In the Linear regression module, you explored how to construct a model to make continuous numerical predictions, such as the fuel efficiency of a car. But what if you want to build a model to answer questions like "Will it rain today?" or "Is this email spam?"

This module introduces a new type of regression model called logistic regression that is designed to predict the probability of a given outcome.
SPEAKER: Thus far in the course, we've
focused on building models that output a numerical prediction.
For example, the amount of time it
takes to drive to your destination.
But what if we want to make other types of predictions
to answer questions like, will it rain today?
Does my car need a new transmission?
Is this email spam?
Let's take a closer look at that last example.
Suppose we want to create a simple spam
filter, which predicts whether an email is legitimate or junk.
We collect some training and test data,
and train a linear regression model
to predict 1, if an email is spam, and 0, if it isn't, based
on the number of spammy words in the email text.
Here are the results.
Let's say we have an email that contains 10 spammy words.
Is it spam?
A score of 1 means spam, and a score of 0 means not spam.
But what about a score of 0.62?
We can think of this score as an indicator of the likelihood
that the email is spam.
The lower the value, the less likely it's spam,
and the higher the value, the more likely it's spam.
But, it would be more useful if a regression model predicted
a formal probability, a value from 0 to 1,
representing the chances the email is spam.
This type of regression task is called logistic regression.
So how do we get a linear model to output a probability?
We need to transform the model to apply some limits,
so it outputs continuous values that
fall within the range from 0 to 1,
where 0 indicates a 0% chance an email is spam,
and 1 indicates a 100% chance it it's spam.
What mathematical function could we use to do this?
Two curves that may come to mind are an exponential curve
and a hyperbola.
Both functions produce outputs that
approach a limit in at least one direction.
But neither function's range is constrained
to values between 0 and 1.
What if we combine the two formulas?
Here, we've created a curve whose output is squished
between values 0 and 1.
As the input decreases to negative infinity,
the output approaches 0.
And as the input increases to infinity,
the output approaches 1.
This curve is called a sigmoid, one
of a family of s-shaped curves called the logistic functions,
from which logistic regression gets its name.
We can use it to map the outputs of our linear model
to a continuous probability range.
Now we can retrain our model to calculate
the probability of spam for any value of our feature, the number
of spammy words.
Using a logistic regression model,
we can predict that our email with 10 spammy words
has a 69% chance of being spam.
Note that in practice, a spam prediction model would likely
train on additional features and use
more sophisticated natural language processing techniques.
Logistic regression is a popular technique for building models
that discriminate between two possible outcomes, including
classification tasks.
We'll further explore these applications later
in the course.

Many problems require a probability estimate as output. Logistic regression is an extremely efficient mechanism for calculating probabilities. Practically speaking, you can use the returned probability in either of the following two ways:

Applied "as is." For example, if a spam-prediction model takes an email as input and outputs a value of 0.932, this implies a 93.2% probability that the email is spam.

Converted to a binary category such as True or False, Spam or Not Spam.

This module focuses on using logistic regression model output as-is. In the Classification module, you'll learn how to convert this output into a binary category.

Sigmoid function
You might be wondering how a logistic regression model can ensure its output represents a probability, always outputting a value between 0 and 1. As it happens, there's a family of functions called logistic functions whose output has those same characteristics. The standard logistic function, also known as the sigmoid function (sigmoid means "s-shaped"), has the formula:


where:

f(x) is the output of the sigmoid function.
e is Euler's number: a mathematical constant ≈ 2.71828.
x is the input to the sigmoid function.
Figure 1 shows the corresponding graph of the sigmoid function.

Figure 1. Graph of the sigmoid function. The curve approaches 0 as x values decrease to negative infinity, and 1 as x values increase toward infinity.
As the input, x, increases, the output of the sigmoid function approaches but never reaches 1. Similarly, as the input decreases, the sigmoid function's output approaches but never reaches 0.

Click here for a deeper dive into the math behind the sigmoid function

Transforming linear output using the sigmoid function
The following equation represents the linear component of a logistic regression model:


where:

z is the output of the linear equation, also called the log odds.
b is the bias.
The w values are the model's learned weights.
The x values are the feature values for a particular example.
To obtain the logistic regression prediction, the z value is then passed to the sigmoid function, yielding a value (a probability) between 0 and 1:


where:

y' is the output of the logistic regression model.
e is Euler's number: a mathematical constant ≈ 2.71828.
z is the linear output (as calculated in the preceding equation).
Click here to learn more about log-odds

Figure 2 illustrates how linear output is transformed to logistic regression output using these calculations.

Figure 2. Left: graph of the linear function z = 2x + 5, with three points highlighted. Right: Sigmoid curve with the same three points highlighted after being transformed by the sigmoid function.
In Figure 2, a linear equation becomes input to the sigmoid function, which bends the straight line into an s-shape. Notice that the linear equation can output very big or very small values of z, but the output of the sigmoid function, y', is always between 0 and 1, exclusive. For example, the yellow square on the left graph has a z value of –10, but the sigmoid function in the right graph maps that –10 into a y' value of 0.00004.

Exercise: Check your understanding
A logistic regression model with three features has the following bias and weights:



Logistic regression
models are trained using the same process as
linear regression
models, with two key distinctions:

Logistic regression models use
Log Loss as the loss function
instead of squared loss.
Applying regularization
is critical to prevent
overfitting.

The following sections discuss these two considerations in more depth.
Log Loss
In the Linear regression module,
you used squared loss (also called
L2 loss) as the
loss function.
Squared loss works well for a linear
model where the rate of change of the output values is constant. For example,
given the linear model $y' = b + 3x_1$, each time you increment the input
value $x_1$ by 1, the output value $y'$ increases by 3.
However, the rate of change of a logistic regression model is not constant.
As you saw in Calculating a probability, the
sigmoid curve is s-shaped
rather than linear. When the log-odds ($z$) value is closer to 0, small
increases in $z$ result in much larger changes to $y$ than when $z$ is a large
positive or negative number. The following table shows the sigmoid function's
output for input values from 5 to 10, as well as the corresponding precision
required to capture the differences in the results.


input
logistic output
required digits of precision


5
0.993
3


6
0.997
3


7
0.999
3


8
0.9997
4


9
0.9999
4


10
0.99998
5


If you used squared loss to calculate errors for the sigmoid function, as the
output got closer and closer to 0 and 1, you would need more memory to
preserve the precision needed to track these values.
Instead, the loss function for logistic regression is
Log Loss. The
Log Loss equation returns the logarithm of the magnitude of the change, rather
than just the distance from data to prediction. Log Loss is calculated as
follows:
$\text{Log Loss} = -\frac{1}{N}\sum_{i=1}^{N} [y_i\log(y_i') + (1 - y_i)\log(1 - y_i')]$

where:

\(N\) is the number of labeled examples in the dataset
\(i\) is the index of an example in the dataset (e.g., \((x_3, y_3)\)
  is the third example in the dataset)

    \(y_i\) is the label for the \(i\)th example. Since this is logistic
    regression, \(y_i\) must either be 0 or 1.
  

    \(y_i'\) is your model's prediction for the \(i\)th example
    (somewhere between 0 and 1), given the set of features in \(x_i\).
  



Click the icon to learn more about Log Loss.


This form of the Log Loss function calculates the mean Log Loss across all
points in the dataset. Using mean Log Loss (as opposed to total Log Loss) is
desirable in practice, because it enables us to decouple tuning of the batch
size and the learning rate.


Regularization in logistic regression
Regularization, a mechanism for
penalizing model complexity during training, is extremely important in logistic
regression modeling. Without regularization, the asymptotic nature of logistic
regression would keep driving loss towards 0 in cases where the model has a
large number of features. Consequently, most logistic regression models use one
of the following two strategies to decrease model complexity:

L2 regularization
Early stopping:
Limiting the number of training steps to halt training while loss is
still decreasing.

Note: You'll learn more about
regularization in the
Datasets, Generalization, and Overfitting
module of the course.
Key terms:

Gradient descent
Linear regression
Log Loss
Logistic regression
Loss function
Overfitting
Regularization
Squared loss