
This module focuses on converting logistic regression models into binary classification models for predicting categories instead of probabilities.


You'll learn how to determine the optimal threshold for classification, calculate and select appropriate evaluation metrics, and interpret ROC and AUC.


The module covers binary and provides an introduction to multi-class classification, building upon prior knowledge of machine learning, linear regression, and logistic regression.


The content explores methods for evaluating the quality of classification model predictions and applying them to real-world scenarios.







Estimated module length: 70 minutes
Learning objectives

Determine an appropriate threshold for a binary classification model.
Calculate and choose appropriate metrics to evaluate a binary
      classification model.
Interpret ROC and AUC.


Prerequisites:
This module assumes you are familiar with the concepts covered in the
     following modules:

Introduction to Machine Learning
Linear regression
Logistic regression


In the Logistic regression module,
you learned how to use the sigmoid function
to convert raw model output to a value between 0 and 1 to make probabilistic
predictions—for example, predicting that a given email has a 75% chance of
being spam. But what if your goal is not to output probability but a
category—for example, predicting whether a given email is "spam" or "not spam"?
Classification is
the task of predicting which of a set of classes
(categories) an example belongs to. In this module, you'll learn how to convert
a logistic regression model that predicts a probability into a
binary classification
model that predicts one of two classes. You'll also learn how to
choose and calculate appropriate metrics to evaluate the quality of a
classification model's predictions. Finally, you'll get a brief introduction to
multi-class classification
problems, which are discussed in more depth later in the course.
Key terms:

Binary classification
Class
Classification
Multi-class classification
Sigmoid function


Let's say you have a logistic regression model for spam-email detection that
predicts a value between 0 and 1, representing the probability that a given
email is spam. A prediction of 0.50 signifies a 50% likelihood that the email is
spam, a prediction of 0.75 signifies a 75% likelihood that the email is spam,
and so on.
You'd like to deploy this model in an email application to filter spam into
a separate mail folder. But to do so, you need to convert the model's raw
numerical output (e.g., 0.75) into one of two categories: "spam" or "not
spam."
To make this conversion, you choose a threshold probability, called a
classification threshold.
Examples with a probability above the threshold value are then assigned
to the positive class,
the class you are testing for (here, spam). Examples with a lower
probability are assigned to the negative class,
the alternative class (here, not spam).


Click here for more details on the classification threshold.


You may be wondering: what happens if the predicted score is equal to
       the classification threshold (for instance, a score of 0.5 where
       the classification threshold is also 0.5)? Handling for this case
       depends on the particular implementation chosen for the classification
       model. The Keras
       library predicts the negative class if the score and threshold
       are equal, but other tools/frameworks may handle this case
       differently.


Suppose the model scores one email as 0.99, predicting
that email has a 99% chance of being spam, and another email as
0.51, predicting it has a 51% chance of being spam. If you set the
classification threshold to 0.5, the model will classify both emails as
spam. If you set the threshold to 0.95, only the email scoring 0.99 will
be classified as spam.
While 0.5 might seem like an intuitive threshold, it's not a good idea if the
cost of one type of wrong classification is greater than the other, or if the
classes are imbalanced. If only 0.01% of emails are spam, or if misfiling
legitimate emails is worse than letting spam into the inbox,
labeling anything the model considers at least 50% likely to be spam
as spam produces undesirable results.
Confusion matrix
The probability score is not reality, or
ground truth.
There are four possible outcomes for each output from a binary classifier.
For the spam classifier example, if you lay out the ground truth as columns
and the model's prediction as rows, the following table, called a
confusion matrix, is the
result:



Actual positive
Actual negative


Predicted positive
True positive (TP): A spam
    email correctly classified as a spam email. These are the spam messages
    automatically sent to the spam folder.

False positive (FP): A not-spam email misclassified as
    spam. These are the legitimate emails that
    wind up in the spam folder.


Predicted negative
False
    negative (FN): A spam email misclassified as not-spam. These are spam
    emails that aren't
    caught by the spam filter and make their way into the inbox.
True negative (TN): A
    not-spam email correctly classified as not-spam.
    These are the legitimate emails that are sent
    directly to the inbox.


Notice that the total in each row gives all predicted positives (TP + FP) and
all predicted negatives (FN + TN), regardless of validity. The total in each
column, meanwhile, gives all real positives (TP + FN) and all real negatives
(FP + TN) regardless of model classification.
When the total of actual positives is not close to the total of actual
negatives, the dataset is
imbalanced. An instance
of an imbalanced dataset might be a set of thousands of photos of clouds, where
the rare cloud type you are interested in, say, volutus clouds, only appears
a few times.
Effect of threshold on true and false positives and negatives
Different thresholds usually result in different numbers of true and false
positives and true and false negatives. The following video explains why this is
the case.




Try changing the threshold yourself.




This widget includes three toy datasets:

Separated, where positive examples and negative examples are generally
 well differentiated, with most positive examples having higher scores than
 negative examples.
Unseparated, where many positive examples have lower scores than
 negative examples, and many negative examples have higher scores than
 positive examples.
Imbalanced, containing only a few examples of the positive class.

Check your understanding


1. Imagine a phishing or malware classification model where
    phishing and malware websites are in the class labeled 1 (true) and
    harmless websites are in the class labeled 0 (false). This model
    mistakenly classifies a legitimate website as malware. What is this called?
    

A false positive
A negative example (legitimate site) has been wrongly
      classified as a positive example (malware site).


A true positive
A true positive would be a malware site correctly
      classified as malware.


A false negative
A false negative would be a malware site incorrectly
      classified as a legitimate site.


A true negative
A true negative would be a legitimate site correctly
      classified as a legitimate site.





2. In general, what happens to the number of false positives when the
    classification threshold increases? What about true positives? Experiment
    with the slider above.
    

Both true and false positives decrease.
As the threshold increases, the model will likely predict
      fewer positives overall, both true and false. A spam classifier with a
      threshold of .9999 will only label an email as spam if it considers the
      classification to be at least 99.99% likely, which means it is highly
      unlikely to mislabel a legitimate email, but also likely to miss actual
      spam email.


Both true and false positives increase.
Using the slider above, try setting the threshold to 0.1,
      then dragging it to 0.9. What happens to the number of false positives
      and true positives?


True positives increase. False positives decrease.
Using the slider above, try setting the threshold to 0.1,
      then dragging it to 0.9. What happens to the number of false positives
      and true positives?





3. In general, what happens to the number of false negatives when the
    classification threshold increases? What about true negatives? Experiment
    with the slider above.
    

Both true and false negatives increase.
As the threshold increases, the model will likely predict
      more negatives overall, both true and false. At a very high threshold,
      almost all emails, both spam and not-spam, will be classified as not-spam.
      


Both true and false negatives decrease.
Using the slider above, try setting the threshold to 0.1,
      then dragging it to 0.9. What happens to the number of false negatives
      and true negatives?


True negatives increase. False negatives decrease.
Using the slider above, try setting the threshold to 0.1,
      then dragging it to 0.9. What happens to the number of false negatives
      and true negatives?



Key terms:

Binary classification
Class-imbalanced dataset
Classification threshold
Confusion matrix
Ground truth
Negative class
Positive class

True and false positives and negatives are used to calculate several useful
metrics for evaluating models. Which evaluation metrics are most
meaningful depends on the specific model and the specific task, the cost
of different misclassifications, and whether the dataset is balanced or
imbalanced.
All of the metrics in this section are calculated at a single fixed threshold,
and change when the threshold changes. Very often, the user tunes the
threshold to optimize one of these metrics.
Accuracy
Accuracy is the proportion of all
classifications that were correct, whether positive or negative. It is
mathematically defined as:
\[\text{Accuracy} =
\frac{\text{correct classifications}}{\text{total classifications}}
= \frac{TP+TN}{TP+TN+FP+FN}\]
In the spam classification example, accuracy measures the fraction of all
emails correctly classified.
A perfect model would have zero false positives and zero false negatives, and
therefore an accuracy of 1.0, or 100%.
Because it incorporates all four outcomes from the
confusion matrix
(TP, FP, TN, FN), given a balanced
dataset, with similar numbers of examples in both classes, accuracy can
serve as a coarse-grained measure of model quality. For this reason, it is often
the default evaluation metric used for generic or unspecified models
carrying out generic or unspecified tasks.
However, when the dataset is imbalanced,
or where one kind of mistake (FN or FP) is more costly than the other, which is
the case in most real-world applications, it's better to optimize for one of
the other metrics instead.
For heavily imbalanced datasets, where one class appears very rarely, say 1% of
the time, a model that predicts negative 100% of the time would score 99% on
accuracy, despite being useless.
Note: In machine learning (ML), words like
recall, precision, and accuracy have mathematical
definitions that may differ from, or be more specific than, more commonly
used meanings of the word.
Recall, or true positive rate
The true positive rate (TPR), or the proportion of all actual positives that
were classified correctly as positives, is also known as
recall.
Recall is mathematically defined as:
\[\text{Recall (or TPR)} =
\frac{\text{correctly classified actual positives}}{\text{all actual positives}}
= \frac{TP}{TP+FN}\]
False negatives are actual positives that were misclassified as negatives, which
is why they appear in the denominator. In the spam classification example,
recall measures the fraction of spam emails that were correctly classified as
spam. This is why another name for recall is probability of detection: it
answers the question "What fraction of spam emails are detected by this
model?"
A hypothetical perfect model would have zero false negatives and therefore a
recall (TPR) of 1.0, which is to say, a 100% detection rate.
In an imbalanced dataset where the number of actual positives is very
low, recall is a more meaningful metric than accuracy because it
measures the ability of the model to correctly identify all positive instances.
For applications like disease prediction, correctly identifying the positive
cases is crucial. A false negative typically has more serious consequences
than a false positive. For a concrete example comparing recall and accuracy
metrics, see the notes in the definition of
recall.
False positive rate
The false positive rate (FPR)
is the proportion of all actual negatives that were classified incorrectly
as positives, also known as the probability of false alarm. It is
mathematically defined as:
\[\text{FPR} =
\frac{\text{incorrectly classified actual negatives}}
{\text{all actual negatives}}
= \frac{FP}{FP+TN}\]
False positives are actual negatives that were misclassified, which is why they
appear in the denominator. In the spam classification example, FPR measures the
fraction of legitimate emails that were incorrectly classified as spam, or the
model's rate of false alarms.
A perfect model would have zero false positives and therefore a FPR of 0.0,
which is to say, a 0% false alarm rate.
For an imbalanced dataset, FPR is generally a more informative metric than
accuracy. However, if the number of actual negatives is very low, FPR may not be
an ideal choice, due to its volatility. For example, if there are only four
actual negatives in a dataset, one misclassification results in an FPR of 25%,
while a second misclassification causes the FPR to jump to 50%. In cases like
this, precision (described next) may be a more stable metric for
evaluating the effects of false positives.
Precision
Precision
is the proportion of all the model's positive classifications
that are actually positive. It is mathematically defined as:
\[\text{Precision} =
\frac{\text{correctly classified actual positives}}
{\text{everything classified as positive}}
= \frac{TP}{TP+FP}\]
In the spam classification example, precision measures the fraction of emails
classified as spam that were actually spam.
A hypothetical perfect model would have zero false positives and therefore a
precision of 1.0.
In an imbalanced dataset where the number of actual positives is very, very
low, say 1-2 examples in total, precision is less meaningful and less useful
as a metric.
Precision improves as false positives decrease, while recall improves when
false negatives decrease. But as seen in the previous section, increasing the
classification threshold tends to decrease the number of false positives and
increase the number of false negatives, while decreasing the threshold has the
opposite effects. As a result, precision and recall often show an inverse
relationship, where improving one of them worsens the other.
Try it yourself:





What does NaN mean in the metrics?

NaN, or "not a number," appears when dividing by 0, which can happen
  with any of these metrics. When TP and FP are both 0, for example, the
  formula for precision has 0 in the denominator, resulting in NaN. While
  in some cases NaN can indicate perfect performance and could be
  replaced by a score of 1.0, it can also come from a model that is practically
  useless. A model that never predicts positive, for example, would have 0 TPs
  and 0 FPs and thus a calculation of its precision would result in NaN.


Choice of metric and tradeoffs
The metric(s) you choose to prioritize when evaluating the model and
choosing a threshold depend on the costs, benefits, and risks of the
specific problem. In the spam classification example, it often makes
sense to prioritize recall, nabbing all the spam emails, or precision,
trying to ensure that spam-labeled emails are in fact spam, or some
balance of the two, above some minimum accuracy level.


Metric
Guidance


Accuracy
Use as a rough indicator of model
    training progress/convergence for balanced datasets.
For model performance, use only in combination with other metrics.
Avoid for imbalanced datasets. Consider using another metric.


Recall(True positive rate)
Use when false negatives are more
    expensive than false positives.


False positive rate
Use when false positives are
    more expensive than false negatives.


Precision
Use when it's very important for
    positive predictions to be accurate.



(Optional, advanced) F1 score

The F1 score is the harmonic mean (a
  kind of average) of precision and recall.
Mathematically, it is given by:
\[\text{F1}=2*\frac{\text{precision * recall}}{\text{precision + recall}}
  = \frac{2\text{TP}}{2\text{TP + FP + FN}}\]
This metric balances the importance of precision and recall, and is
  preferable to accuracy for class-imbalanced datasets. When precision
  and recall both have perfect scores of 1.0, F1 will also have a perfect score
  of 1.0. More broadly, when precision and recall are close in value, F1 will
  be close to their value. When precision and recall are far apart, F1 will
  be similar to whichever metric is worse.


Exercise: Check your understanding


A model outputs 5 TP, 6 TN, 3 FP, and 2 FN. Calculate the recall.
    

0.714
Recall is calculated as \(\frac{TP}{TP+FN}=\frac{5}{7}\).
      


0.455
Recall considers all actual positives, not all correct
      classifications. The formula for recall is \(\frac{TP}{TP+FN}\).


0.625
Recall considers all actual positives, not all positive
      classifications. The formula for recall is \(\frac{TP}{TP+FN}\)





A model outputs 3 TP, 4 TN, 2 FP, and 1 FN. Calculate the precision.
    

0.6
Precision is calculated as \(\frac{TP}{TP+FP}=\frac{3}{5}\).
      


0.75
Precision considers all positive classifications, not all
      actual positives. The formula for precision is \(\frac{TP}{TP+FP}\).


0.429
Precision considers all positive classifications, not all
      correct classifications. The formula for precision is \(\frac{TP}{TP+FP}\)





You're building a binary classifier that checks photos of insect traps
    for whether a dangerous invasive species is present. If the model detects
    the species, the entomologist (insect scientist) on duty is notified. Early
    detection of this insect is critical to preventing an infestation. A
    false alarm (false positive) is easy to handle: the entomologist sees that
    the photo was misclassified and marks it as such. Assuming an acceptable
    accuracy level, which metric should this model be optimized for?
    

Recall
In this scenario, false alarms (FP) are low-cost, and false
      negatives are highly costly, so it makes sense to maximize recall, or the probability of
      detection.
      


False positive rate (FPR)
In this scenario, false alarms (FP) are low-cost. Trying
      to minimize them at the risk of missing actual positives doesn't make
      sense.


Precision
In this scenario, false alarms (FP) aren't particularly
      harmful, so trying to improve the correctness of positive classifications
      doesn't make sense.



Key terms:

Accuracy
False positive rate (FPR)
Precision
Recall

The previous section presented a set of model metrics, all calculated at a
single classification threshold value. But if you want to evaluate a
model's quality across all possible thresholds, you need different tools.
Receiver-operating characteristic curve (ROC)
The ROC curve
is a visual representation of model performance across all thresholds.
The long version of the name, receiver operating characteristic, is a holdover
from WWII radar detection.
The ROC curve is drawn by calculating the true positive rate (TPR)
and false positive rate (FPR) at every possible threshold (in practice, at
selected intervals), then graphing TPR over FPR. A perfect model,
which at some threshold has a TPR of 1.0 and a FPR of 0.0, can
be represented by either a point at
(0, 1) if all other thresholds are ignored, or by the following:



Figure 1. ROC and AUC of a hypothetical perfect model.
  

Area under the curve (AUC)
The area under the ROC curve (AUC)
represents the probability that the model,
if given a randomly chosen positive and negative example, will rank the
positive higher than the negative.
The perfect model above, containing a square with sides of length 1, has an
area under the curve (AUC) of 1.0. This means there is a 100% probability that
the model will correctly rank a randomly chosen positive example higher than a
randomly chosen negative example. In other words, looking at the spread of
data points below, AUC gives the probability that the model will place a
randomly chosen square to the right of a randomly chosen circle, independent of
where the threshold is set.



Figure 2. A spread of predictions for a binary classification model. AUC is the chance a randomly chosen square is positioned to the right of a randomly chosen circle.
  

In more concrete terms, a spam classifier with AUC
of 1.0 always assigns a random spam email a higher probability of being
spam than a random legitimate email. The actual classification of each
email depends on the threshold that you choose.
For a binary classifier, a model that does exactly as well as random guesses or
coin flips has a ROC that is a diagonal line from (0,0) to (1,1). The AUC is
0.5, representing a 50% probability of correctly ranking a random positive and
negative example.
In the spam classifier example, a spam classifier with AUC of 0.5 assigns
a random spam email a higher probability of being spam than a random
legitimate email only half the time.



Figure 3. ROC and AUC of completely random guesses.
  


(Optional, advanced) Precision-recall curve

AUC and ROC work well for comparing models when the dataset is roughly
  balanced between classes. When the dataset is imbalanced, precision-recall
  curves (PRCs) and the area under those curves may offer a better comparative
  visualization of model performance. Precision-recall curves are created by
  plotting precision on the y-axis and recall on the x-axis across all
  thresholds.



AUC and ROC for choosing model and threshold
AUC is a useful measure for comparing the performance of two different models,
as long as the dataset is roughly balanced. The model with greater area under
the curve is generally the better one.




Figure 4. ROC and AUC of two hypothetical models. The curve on the
    right, with a greater AUC, represents the better of the two models.
  

The points on a ROC curve closest to (0,1) represent a range of the
best-performing thresholds for the given model. As discussed in the
Thresholds,
Confusion matrix
and
Choice of metric and tradeoffs
sections, the threshold you choose depends on which metric is most important to
the specific use case. Consider the points A, B, and C in the following
diagram, each representing a threshold:



Figure 5. Three labeled points representing thresholds.
  

If false positives (false alarms) are highly costly, it may make sense to
choose a threshold that gives a lower FPR, like the one at point A, even if TPR
is reduced. Conversely, if false positives are cheap and false negatives
(missed true positives) highly costly, the threshold for point C, which
maximizes TPR, may be preferable. If the costs are roughly equivalent, point B
may offer the best balance between TPR and FPR.
Here is the ROC curve for the data we have seen before:




Exercise: Check your understanding


In practice, ROC curves are much less regular than the illustrations
    given above. Which of the following models, represented by their ROC curve
    and AUC, has the best performance?
    


This model has the highest AUC, which corresponds with the best
           performance.
      

















Which of the following models performs worse than chance?
    


This model has an AUC lower than 0.5, which means it performs worse
           than chance.
      



This model performs slightly better than chance.



This model performs the same as chance.



This is a hypothetical perfect classifier.





Which of the following changes can be made to the worse-than-chance
    model in the previous question to cause it to perform better than chance?
    

Reverse the predictions, so predictions of 1 become
      0, and predictions of 0 become 1.
If a binary classifier reliably puts examples in the
      wrong classes more often than chance, switching the class label
      immediately makes its predictions better than chance without having to
      retrain the model.
      


Have it always predict the negative class.
This may or may not improve performance above chance. Also, as
      discussed in the Accuracy section,
      this isn't a useful model.


Have it always predict the positive class.
This may or may not improve performance above chance. Also, as
      discussed in the Accuracy section,
      this isn't a useful model.





Imagine a situation where it's better to allow some spam to reach the
    inbox than to send a business-critical email to the spam folder. You've
    trained a spam classifier for this situation where the positive class is
    spam and the negative class is not-spam.
    Which of the following points
    on the ROC curve for your classifier is preferable?



Point A
In this use case, it's better to minimize false positives,
      even if true positives also decrease.
      


Point B
This threshold balances true and false positives.


Point C
This threshold maximizes true positives (flags more spam)
      at a cost of more false positives (more legitimate emails flagged as
      spam).



Key terms:

Area under the ROC curve (AUC)
ROC curve

Prediction bias, calculated as the difference between the average prediction and the average ground truth, is a quick check for model or data issues.


A model with zero prediction bias ideally predicts the same average outcome as observed in the ground truth data, such as a spam detection model predicting the same percentage of spam emails as actually present in the dataset.


Significant prediction bias can indicate problems in the training data, the model itself, or the new data being applied to the model.


Common causes of prediction bias include biased data, excessive regularization, bugs in the training process, and insufficient features provided to the model.







Calculating
prediction bias
is a quick check that can flag issues with the model or training data
early on.
Prediction bias is the difference between the mean of a model's
predictions
and the mean of
ground-truth labels in the
data. A model trained on a dataset
where 5% of the emails are spam should predict, on average, that 5% of the
emails it classifies are spam. In other words, the mean of the labels in the
ground-truth dataset is 0.05, and the mean of the model's predictions should
also be 0.05. If this is the case, the model has zero prediction bias. Of
course, the model might still have other problems.
If the model instead predicts 50% of the time that an email is spam, then
something is wrong with the training dataset, the new dataset the model is
applied to, or with the model itself. Any
significant difference between the two means suggests that the model has
some prediction bias.
Prediction bias can be caused by:

Biases or noise in the data, including biased sampling for the training set
Too-strong regularization, meaning that the model was oversimplified and lost
some necessary complexity
Bugs in the model training pipeline
The set of features provided to the model being insufficient for the task

Key terms:

Ground truth
Prediction
Prediction bias

Multi-class classification can be treated as an extension of binary classification to more than two classes. If each example can only be assigned to one class, then the classification problem can be handled as a binary classification problem, where one class contains one of the multiple classes, and the other class contains all the other classes put together. The process can then be repeated for each of the original classes.

For example, in a three-class multi-class classification problem, where you're classifying examples with the labels A, B, and C, you could turn the problem into two separate binary classification problems. First, you might create a binary classifier that categorizes examples using the label A+B and the label C. Then, you could create a second binary classifier that reclassifies the examples that are labeled A+B using the label A and the label B.

An example of a multi-class problem is a handwriting classifier that takes an image of a handwritten digit and decides which digit, 0-9, is represented.

If class membership isn't exclusive, which is to say, an example can be assigned to multiple classes, this is known as a multi-label classification problem.