
This module explores neural networks, a model architecture designed to automatically identify nonlinear patterns in data, eliminating the need for manual feature cross experimentation.


You will learn the fundamental components of a deep neural network, including nodes, hidden layers, and activation functions, and how they contribute to prediction.


The module covers the training process of neural networks, using the backpropagation algorithm to optimize predictions and minimize loss.


Additionally, you will gain insights into how neural networks handle multi-class classification problems using one-vs.-all and one-vs.-one approaches.


This module builds on prior knowledge of machine learning concepts such as linear and logistic regression, classification, and working with numerical and categorical data.







Estimated module length: 75 minutes
Learning objectives

Explain the motivation for building neural networks, and the use
        cases they address.
Define and explain the function of the key components of a deep neural
        network architecture:
      
Nodes
Hidden layers
Activation functions


Develop intuition around how neural network predictions are made, by
        stepping through the inference process.
Build a high-level intuition of how neural networks are trained, using
        the backpropagation algorithm.
Explain how neural networks can be used to perform two types of
        multi-class classification: one-vs.-all and one-vs.-one.


Prerequisites:
This module assumes you are familiar with the concepts covered in the
     following modules:

Introduction to Machine Learning
Linear regression
Logistic regression
Classification
Working with numerical data
Working with categorical data
Datasets, generalization, and overfitting


You may recall from the
Feature cross exercises
in the Categorical data module,
that the following classification problem is nonlinear:



Figure 1. Nonlinear classification problem. A linear function cannot
       cleanly separate all the blue dots from the orange dots.
  

"Nonlinear" means that you can't accurately predict a label with a
model of the form \(b + w_1x_1 + w_2x_2\). In other words, the
"decision surface" is not a line.
However, if we perform a feature cross on our features $x_1$ and $x_2$, we can
then represent the nonlinear relationship between the two features using a
linear model:
$b + w_1x_1 + w_2x_2 + w_3x_3$ where $x_3$ is the feature cross between
$x_1$ and $x_2$:



Figure 2. By adding the feature cross
      x1x2, the linear model can learn
      a hyperbolic shape that separates the blue dots from the orange dots.
  

Now consider the following dataset:



Figure 3. A more difficult nonlinear classification problem.
  

You may also recall from the Feature cross exercises
that determining the correct feature crosses to fit a linear model to this data
took a bit more effort and experimentation.
But what if you didn't have to do all that experimentation yourself? 
Neural networks are a family
of model architectures designed to find
nonlinear
patterns in data. During training of a neural network, the
model automatically
learns the optimal feature crosses to perform on the input data to minimize
loss.
In the following sections, we'll take a closer look at how neural networks work.
Key terms:

Activation function
Hidden layer
Linear model
Model
Neural network
Nodes
Nonlinear


To build a neural network
that learns nonlinearities,
begin with the following familiar model structure: a
linear model of the form
$y' = b + w_1x_1 + w_2x_2 + w_3x_3$.
We can visualize this equation as shown below, where $x_1$,
$x_2$, and $x_3$ are our three input nodes (in blue), and $y'$ is our output node
(in green).




Exercise 1
In the model above, the weight and
bias values have been randomly
initialized. Perform the following tasks to familiarize yourself with the
interface and explore the linear model. You can
ignore the Activation Function dropdown for now; we'll discuss this
topic later on in the module.

Click the Play (▶️) button above the network to calculate the value of
the output node for the input values $x_1 = 1.00$, $x_2 = 2.00$, and
$x_3 = 3.00$.
Click the second node in the
input layer, and increase
the value from 2.00
to 2.50. Note that the value of the output node changes. Select the output
nodes (in green) and review the Calculations panel to see how the output
value was calculated.
Notes about calculations:

Values displayed are rounded to the hundredths place.
The Linear() function simply returns the value 
  it is passed.

Click the output node (in green) to see the weight ($w_1$, $w_2$, $w_3$) and
bias ($b$) parameter values. Decrease the weight value for
$w_3$ (again, note that the value of the output node and the calculations below
have changed). Then, increase the bias value. Review how these changes
have affected the model output.

Adding layers to the network
Note that when you adjusted the weight and bias values of the network in 
Exercise 1, that didn't change the overall mathematical
relationship between input and output. Our model is still a linear model.
But what if we add another layer to the network, in between the input layer
and the output layer? In neural network terminology, additional layers between
the input layer and the output layer are called
hidden layers, and the nodes
in these layers are called 
neurons. 
The value of each neuron in the hidden layer is calculated the same way as the
output of a linear model: take the sum of the product of each of its inputs
(the neurons in the previous network layer) and a unique weight parameter,
plus the bias. Similarly, the neurons in the next layer (here, the output layer)
are calculated using the hidden layer's neuron values as inputs.
This new hidden layer allows our model to recombine the input data using another
set of parameters. Can this help our model learn nonlinear relationships?
Exercise 2
We've added a hidden layer containing four neurons to the model.




Click the Play (▶️) button above the network to calculate the value of
the four hidden-layer nodes and the output node for the input values
$x_1 = 1.00$, $x_2 = 2.00$, and $x_3 = 3.00$.
Then explore the model, and use it to answer the following questions.


How many 
parameters (weights and biases) does this neural
    network model have?

4
Our original model in Exercise 1 had
           four parameters: w11, w21,
           w31, and b. Because this model contains a
           hidden layer, there are more parameters.


12
Note that the total number of parameters includes both the parameters
           used to calculate the node values in the hidden layer from the
           input values, and the parameters used to calculate the output value
           from the node values in the hidden layer.


16
Note that the total number of parameters includes both the weight
           parameters and the bias parameters.


21
There are 4 parameters used to calculate each of the 4 node values in
           the hidden layer—3 weights (one for each input value) and a
           bias—which sums to 16 parameters. Then there are 5 parameters used
           to calculate the output value: 4 weights (one for each node in the
           hidden layer) and a bias. In total, this neural network has 21
           parameters.





Try modifying the model parameters, and observe the effect on the
         hidden-layer node values and the output value (you can review the
         Calculations panel below to see how these values were
         calculated).
Can this model learn nonlinearities?

Yes
Click on each of the nodes in the hidden layer and the output node, 
           and review the calculations below. What do you notice about
           all these calculations?


No
If you click on each of the nodes in the hidden layer and review
           the calculations below, you'll see that all of them are linear
           (comprising multiplication and addition operations).
If you then click on the output node and review the calculation
           below, you'll see that this calculation is also linear. Linear
           calculations performed on the output of linear calculations are
           also linear, which means this model cannot learn nonlinearities.



Key terms:

Bias
Hidden layer
Input layer
Linear model
Model
Neural network
Neuron
Nonlinear
Parameter
Weight

You saw in the previous exercise that just adding
hidden layers to our network wasn't sufficient to represent nonlinearities.
Linear operations performed on linear operations are still linear.
How can you configure a neural network to learn
nonlinear relationships between values? We need some way to insert nonlinear
mathematical operations into a model.
If this seems somewhat familiar, that's because we've actually applied
nonlinear mathematical operations to the output of a linear model earlier in
the course. In the Logistic Regression 
module, we adapted a linear regression model to output a continuous value from 0
to 1 (representing a probability) by passing the model's output through a
sigmoid function.
We can apply the same principle to our neural network. Let's revisit our model
from Exercise 2 earlier, but this time, before
outputting the value of each node, we'll first apply the sigmoid function:




Try stepping through the calculations of each node by clicking the >| button
(to the right of the play button). Review the mathematical operations performed
to calculate each node value in the Calculations panel below the graph.
Note that each node's output is now a sigmoid transform of the linear
combination of the nodes in the previous layer, and the output values are
all squished between 0 and 1.
Here, the sigmoid serves as an
activation function
for the neural network, a nonlinear transform of a neuron's output value
before the value is passed as input to the calculations of the next
layer of the neural network.
Now that we've added an activation function, adding layers has more impact.
Stacking nonlinearities on nonlinearities lets us model very complicated
relationships between the inputs and the predicted outputs. In brief, each layer
is effectively learning a more complex, higher-level function over the raw
inputs. If you'd like to develop more intuition on how this works,
see Chris Olah's excellent blog post.
Common activation functions
Three mathematical functions that are commonly used as activation functions are
sigmoid, tanh, and ReLU.
The sigmoid function (discussed above) performs the following transform on input
$x$, producing an output value between 0 and 1:
\[F(x)=\frac{1} {1+e^{-x}}\]
The term sigmoid is often used more generally to
refer to any S-shaped function. A more technically precise term for the specific
function $F(x)=\frac{1} {1+e^{-x}}$ is logistic function.
Here's a plot of this function:



Figure 4. Plot of the sigmoid function.


The tanh (short for "hyperbolic tangent") function transforms input $x$ to
produce an output value between –1 and 1:
\[F(x)=tanh(x)\]
Here's a plot of this function:



Figure 5. Plot of the tanh function.


Note that the range of the sigmoid function is 0 to 1, and
the range of the tanh function is –1 to 1
The rectified linear unit activation function (or ReLU, for
short) transforms output using the following algorithm:

If the input value $x$ is less than 0, return 0.
If the input value $x$ is greater than or equal to 0, return the input value.

ReLU can be represented mathematically using the max() function:

$$F(x)=max(0,x)$$

Here's a plot of this function:



Figure 6. Plot of the ReLU function.


ReLU often works a little better as an activation function than a smooth
function like sigmoid or tanh, because it is less susceptible to the
vanishing gradient problem
during neural network training. ReLU is also significantly easier
to compute than these functions.
Other activation functions
In practice, any mathematical function can serve as an activation function.
Suppose that \(\sigma\) represents our activation function.
The value of a node in the network is given by the following
formula:

$$\sigma(\boldsymbol w \cdot \boldsymbol x+b)$$

Keras provides out-of-the-box support for many
activation functions.
That said, we still recommend starting with ReLU.
Summary
The following video provides a recap of everything you've learned thus far
about how neural networks are constructed:




Now our model has all the standard components of what people usually
mean when they refer to a neural network:

A set of nodes, analogous to neurons, organized in layers.
A set of learned weights and biases representing the connections between
each neural network layer and the layer beneath it. The layer beneath may be
another neural network layer, or some other kind of layer.
An activation function that transforms the output of each node in a layer.
Different layers may have different activation functions.

A caveat: neural networks aren't necessarily always better than
feature crosses, but neural networks do offer a flexible alternative that works
well in many cases.
Key terms:

Activation function
Sigmoid function
Vanishing gradient problem

ackpropagation is the primary training algorithm for neural networks, enabling gradient descent for multi-layer networks and often handled automatically by machine learning libraries.


Vanishing gradients occur when gradients in lower layers become very small, hindering their training, and can be mitigated by using ReLU activation function.


Exploding gradients happen when large weights cause excessively large gradients, disrupting convergence, and can be addressed with batch normalization or lowering the learning rate.


Dead ReLU units emerge when a ReLU unit's output gets stuck at 0, halting gradient flow, and can be avoided by lowering the learning rate or using ReLU variants like LeakyReLU.


Dropout regularization is a technique to prevent overfitting by randomly dropping unit activations during training, with higher dropout rates indicating stronger regularization.







Backpropagation is the
most common training algorithm for neural networks.
It makes gradient descent feasible for multi-layer neural networks.
Many machine learning code libraries (such as Keras)
handle backpropagation automatically, so you don't need to perform any of
the underlying calculations yourself. Check out the following video for a
conceptual overview of how backpropagation works:




Best practices for neural network training
This section explains backpropagation's failure cases and the most
common way to regularize a neural network.
NOTE: The backpropagation training
algorithm makes use of the calculus concept of a
gradient to adjust model
weights to minimize loss. Understanding and debugging the issues below usually
requires some background in calculus.
Vanishing Gradients
The gradients for the lower neural
network layers (those closer to the input layer) can become very small.
In deep networks (networks with
more than one hidden layer), computing these gradients can involve taking the
product of many small terms.
When the gradient values approach 0 for the lower layers, the gradients are
said to "vanish". Layers with vanishing gradients train very slowly, or not
at all.
The ReLU activation function can help prevent vanishing gradients.
Exploding Gradients
If the weights in a network are very large, then the gradients for the lower
layers involve products of many large terms. In this case you can have
exploding gradients: gradients that get too large to converge.
Batch normalization can help prevent exploding gradients, as can lowering the
learning rate.
Dead ReLU Units
Once the weighted sum for a ReLU unit falls below 0, the ReLU unit can get
stuck. It outputs 0, contributing nothing to the network's output,
and gradients can no longer flow through it during backpropagation. With a
source of gradients cut off, the input to the ReLU may not ever change enough
to bring the weighted sum back above 0.
Lowering the learning rate can help keep ReLU units from dying.
There are also many variants of ReLU that were designed
to address this specific problem, such as 

LeakyReLU, which you may want to consider using as an activation function
to prevent dead ReLU units.
Dropout Regularization
Yet another form of regularization, called
dropout regularization,
is useful for neural networks. It works by randomly "dropping out"
unit activations in a network for a single gradient step.
The more you drop out, the stronger the regularization:

0.0 = No dropout regularization.
1.0 = Drop out all nodes.  The model learns nothing.
Values between 0.0 and 1.0 = More useful.

Key terms:

Backpropagation
Dropout regularization
Exploding gradient problem
Vanishing gradient problem

In the interactive exercises below, you'll further explore the inner workings of
neural networks. First, you'll see how parameter and hyperparameter changes
affect the network's predictions. Then you'll use what you've learned to train a
neural network to fit nonlinear data.
Exercise 1
The following widget sets up a neural network with the following configuration:

Input layer with 3 neurons containing the values 0.00, 0.00, and 0.00
Hidden layer with 4 neurons
Output layer with 1 neuron
ReLU activation function applied to
all hidden layer nodes and the output node

Review the initial setup of the network (note: do not click the ▶️ or 
>| buttons yet), and then complete the tasks below the widget.




Task 1
The values for the three input features to the neural network model are all
0.00. Click each of the nodes in the network to see all the initialized
values. Before hitting the Play (▶️) button, answer this question:


What kind of output value do you
think will be produced: positive, negative, or 0?

Positive output value
You chose positive
    output value. Follow the instructions below
    to perform inference on the input data and see if you're right.


Negative output value
You chose negative
    output value. Follow the instructions below
    to perform inference on the input data and see if you're right.


Output value of 0
You chose output
    value of 0. Follow the instructions below
    to perform inference on the input data and see if you're right.



Now click the Play (▶️) button above the network, and watch all the hidden-layer
and output node values populate. Was your answer above correct?

Click here for an explanation

The exact output value you get will vary based on how the weight
     and bias parameters are randomly initialized. However, since each neuron
     in the input layer has a value of 0, the weights used to calculate the
     hidden-layer node values will all be zeroed out. For example, the first
     hidden layer node calculation will be:
y = ReLU(w11* 0.00 + w21* 0.00 + w31* 0.00 + b)
y = ReLU(b)
So each hidden-layer node's value will be equal to the ReLU value of the
     bias (b), which will be 0 if b is negative and b itself if b is 0 or
     positive.
The value of the output node will then be calculated as follows:
y = ReLU(w11* x11 + w21* x21
     + w31* x31 + w41* x41 + b)


Task 2
Before modifying the neural network, answer the following question:


If you add another hidden layer
  to the neural network after the first hidden layer, and give this new layer 3 nodes, keeping all
  input and weight/bias parameters the same, which other nodes' calculations
  will be affected?

All the nodes
    in the network, except the input nodes
You chose all the
    nodes in the network, except the input nodes. Follow the
    instructions below to update the neural network and see if you're
    correct.


Just the nodes in the
    first hidden layer
You chose just the
    nodes in the first hidden layer. Follow the instructions below
    to update the neural network and see if you're correct.


Just the output node
You chose just the
    output node. Follow the instructions below to update the
    neural network and see if you're correct.



Now modify the neural network to add a new hidden layer with 3 nodes as follows:

Click the + button to the left of the text 1 hidden layer to add a new
hidden layer before the output layer.
Click the + button above the new hidden layer twice to add 2 more nodes
to the layer.

Was your answer above correct?

Click here for an explanation

Only the output node changes. Because inference for this neural network
  is "feed-forward" (calculations progress from start to finish), the addition
  of a new layer to the network will only affect nodes after the new
  layer, not those that precede it.


Task 3
Click the second node (from the top) in the first hidden layer of the network
graph. Before making any changes to the network configuration, answer the
following question:


If you change the value of the
  weight w12 (displayed below the first input node, x1),
  which other nodes' calculations could be affected for some input
  values?

None
You chose none
    . Follow the instructions below to update the neural network and
    see if you're correct.


The second node in
    the first hidden layer, all the nodes in the second hidden layer, and the
    output node.
You chose the second
    node in the first hidden layer, all the nodes in the second hidden layer,
    and the output node. Follow the instructions below
    to update the neural network and see if you're correct.


All the nodes in the
    first hidden layer, the second hidden layer, and the output layer.
You chose all the
    nodes in the first hidden layer, the second hidden layer, and the
    output layer. Follow the instructions below
    to update the neural network and see if you're correct.



Now, click in the text field for the weight w12 (displayed below the
first input node, x1), change its value to 5.00, and hit Enter.
Observe the updates to the graph. 
Was your answer correct? Be careful when verifying your answer: if a node
value doesn't change, does that mean the underlying calculation didn't change?

Click here for an explanation

The only node affected in the first hidden layer is the second node (the
  one you clicked). The value calculations for the other nodes in the first
  hidden layer do not contain w12 as a parameter, so they are not
  affected. All the nodes in the second hidden layer are affected, as their
  calculations depend on the value of the second node in the first
  hidden layer. Similarly, the output node value is affected because its
  calculations depend on the values of the nodes in the second hidden layer.
Did you think the answer was "none" because none of the node values in the
  network changed when you changed the weight value? Note that an underlying
  calculation for a node may change without changing the node's value
  (e.g., ReLU(0) and ReLU(–5) both produce an output of 0).
  Don't make assumptions about how the network was affected just by
  looking at the node values; make sure to review the calculations as well.


Exercise 2
In the Feature cross exercises
in the Categorical data module,
you manually constructed feature crosses to fit nonlinear data.
Now, you'll see if you can build a neural network that can automatically learn
how to fit nonlinear data during training.
Your task: configure a neural network that can separate the orange dots from
the blue dots in the diagram below, achieving a loss of less than 0.2 on both
the training and test data.
Instructions:
In the interactive widget below:

Modify the neural network hyperparameters by experimenting with some
of the following config settings:

Add or remove hidden layers by clicking the + and - buttons to the
left of the HIDDEN LAYERS heading in the network diagram.
Add or remove neurons from a hidden layer by clicking the + and -
buttons above a hidden-layer column.
Change the learning rate by choosing a new value from the Learning rate
drop-down above the diagram.
Change the activation function by choosing a new value from the 
Activation drop-down above the diagram.

Click the Play (▶️) button above the diagram to train the neural network
model using the specified parameters.
Observe the visualization of the model fitting the data as training
progresses, as well as the
Test loss and
Training loss values in
the Output section.
If the model does not achieve loss below 0.2 on the test and training data,
click reset, and repeat steps 1–3 with a different set of configuration
settings. Repeat this process until you achieve the preferred results.


Click here for our solution

We were able to achieve both test and training loss below 0.2 by:

Adding 1 hidden layer containing 3 neurons.
Choosing a learning rate of 0.01.
Choosing an activation function of ReLU.








Key terms:

Test loss
Training loss

his document explores multi-class classification models, which predict from multiple possibilities instead of just two, like binary classification models.


Multi-class classification can be achieved through two main approaches: one-vs.-all and one-vs.-one (softmax).


One-vs.-all uses multiple binary classifiers, one for each possible outcome, to determine the probability of each class independently.


One-vs.-one (softmax) predicts probabilities of each class relative to all other classes, ensuring all probabilities sum to 1 using the softmax function.


Softmax is efficient for fewer classes but can become computationally expensive with many classes; candidate sampling offers an alternative for increased efficiency.







Earlier, you encountered
binary classification
models that could pick between one of two possible choices, such as whether:

A given email is spam or not spam.
A given tumor is malignant or benign.

In this section, we'll investigate
multi-class classification
models, which can pick from multiple possibilities. For example:

Is this dog a beagle, a basset hound, or a bloodhound?
Is this flower a Siberian Iris, Dutch Iris, Blue Flag Iris,
or Dwarf Bearded Iris?
Is that plane a Boeing 747, Airbus 320, Boeing 777, or Embraer 190?
Is this an image of an apple, bear, candy, dog, or egg?

Some real-world multi-class problems entail choosing from millions
of separate classes.  For example, consider a multi-class classification
model that can identify the image of just about anything.
This section details the two main variants of multi-class classification:

one-vs.-all
one-vs.-one, which is usually known as
softmax

One versus all
One-vs.-all provides a way to use binary classification
for a series of yes or no predictions across multiple possible labels.
Given a classification problem with N possible solutions, a one-vs.-all
solution consists of N separate binary classifiers—one binary
classifier for each possible outcome. During training, the model runs
through a sequence of binary classifiers, training each to answer a separate
classification question.
For example, given a picture of a piece of fruit, four
different recognizers might be trained, each answering a different yes/no 
question:

Is this image an apple?
Is this image an orange?
Is this image a banana?
Is this image a grape?

The following image illustrates how this works in practice.



Figure 7. An image of a pear being passed as input to four different
      binary classifiers. The first, second, and fourth models (predicting
      whether or not the image is an apple, orange, or grape, respectively)
      predict the negative class. The third model (predicting whether or not
      the image is a pear) predicts the positive class.


For more on how binary classifiers make predictions
(setting a classification threshold to convert numerical model output into
a positive or negative label), see the 
Classification
module.
This approach is fairly reasonable when the total number of classes
is small, but becomes increasingly inefficient as the number of classes
rises.
We can create a significantly more efficient one-vs.-all model
with a deep neural network in which each output node represents a different
class. The following image illustrates this approach.



Figure 8. The same one-vs.-all classification tasks accomplished using a
      neural net model. A sigmoid activation function is applied to the output
      layer, and each output value represents the probability that the input
      image is a specified fruit. This model predicts that there is a 84%
      chance that the image is a pear, and a 7% chance that the image is a
      grape.


One versus one (softmax)
You may have noticed that the probability values in the output layer of Figure 8
don't sum to 1.0 (or 100%). (In fact, they sum to 1.43.) In a one-vs.-all
approach, the probability of each binary set of outcomes is determined
independently of all the other sets. That is, we're determining the probability
of "apple" versus "not apple" without considering the likelihood of our other
fruit options: "orange", "pear", or "grape."
But what if we want to predict the probabilities of each fruit
relative to each other? In this case, instead of predicting "apple" versus "not
apple", we want to predict "apple" versus "orange" versus "pear" versus "grape".
This type of multi-class classification is called one-vs.-one classification.
We can implement a one-vs.-one classification using the same type of neural
network architecture used for one-vs.-all classification, with one key change.
We need to apply a different transform to the output layer.
For one-vs.-all, we applied the sigmoid activation function to each output
node independently, which resulted in an output value between 0 and 1 for each
node, but did not guarantee that these values summed to exactly 1.
For one-vs.-one, we can instead apply a function called softmax, which
assigns decimal probabilities to each class in a multi-class problem such that
all probabilities add up to 1.0. This additional constraint
helps training converge more quickly than it otherwise would.


Click the plus icon to see the softmax equation.


The softmax equation is as follows:

$$p(y = j|\textbf{x})  = \frac{e^{(\textbf{w}_j^{T}\textbf{x} + b_j)}}{\sum_{k\in K} {e^{(\textbf{w}_k^{T}\textbf{x} + b_k)}} }$$

Note that this formula basically extends the formula for logistic
regression into multiple classes.


The following image re-implements our one-vs.-all multi-class classification
task as a one-vs.-one task. Note that in order to perform softmax, the hidden
layer directly preceding the output layer (called the softmax layer) must have
the same number of nodes as the output layer.



Figure 9. Neural net implementation of one-vs.-one classification, using
      a softmax layer. Each output value represents the probability that the
      input image is the specified fruit and not any of the other three fruits
      (all probabilities sum to 1.0). This model predicts that there is a 63%
      chance that the image is a pear.


Softmax options
Consider the following variants of softmax:

Full softmax is the softmax we've been discussing; that is,
softmax calculates a probability for every possible class.
Candidate sampling means that softmax calculates a probability
for all the positive labels but only for a random sample of
negative labels. For example, if we are interested in determining
whether an input image is a beagle or a bloodhound, we don't have to
provide probabilities for every non-doggy example.

Full softmax is fairly cheap when the number of classes is small
but becomes prohibitively expensive when the number of classes climbs.
Candidate sampling can improve efficiency in problems having a large
number of classes.
One label versus many labels
Softmax assumes that each example is a member of exactly one class.
Some examples, however, can simultaneously be a member of multiple classes.
For such examples:

You may not use softmax.
You must rely on multiple logistic regressions.

For example, the one-vs.-one model in Figure 9 above assumes that each input
image will depict exactly one type of fruit: an apple, an orange, a pear, or
a grape. However, if an input image might contain multiple types of fruit—a 
bowl of both apples and oranges—you'll have to use multiple logistic
regressions instead.
Key terms:

Binary classification
Multi class classification
One-vs.-all classification
softmax (one-vs.-one classification)