A machine learning model's performance is heavily reliant on the quality and quantity of the dataset it's trained on, with larger, high-quality datasets generally leading to better results.


Datasets can contain various data types, including numerical, categorical, text, multimedia, and embedding vectors, each requiring specific handling for optimal model training.


Maintaining data quality involves addressing issues like label errors, noisy features, and proper filtering to ensure the reliability of the dataset for accurate predictions.


Incomplete examples with missing feature values should be handled by either deletion or imputation to avoid negatively impacting model training.


When imputing missing values, use reliable methods like mean/median imputation and consider adding an indicator column to signal imputed values to the model.








A dataset is a collection of
examples.
Many datasets store data in tables (grids), for example, as
comma-separated values (CSV) or directly from spreadsheets or
database tables. Tables are an intuitive input format for machine
learning models.
You can imagine each row of the table as an example
and each column as a potential feature or label.
That said, datasets may also be derived from other formats, including
log files and protocol buffers.
Regardless of the format, your ML model is only as good as the
data it trains on. This section examines key data characteristics.
Types of data
A dataset could contain many kinds of datatypes, including but certainly
not limited to:

numerical data, which is covered in a separate
unit
categorical data, which is covered in a separate
unit
human language, including individual words and sentences, all the way up to
entire text documents
multimedia (such as images, videos, and audio files)
outputs from other ML systems
embedding vectors, which are
covered in a later unit

Quantity of data
As a rough rule of thumb, your model should train on at least an order
of magnitude (or two) more examples than trainable parameters. However, good
models generally train on substantially more examples than that.
Models trained on large datasets with few
features
generally outperform models trained on small datasets with
a lot of features.
Google has historically had great success training simple models on
large datasets.
Different datasets for different machine learning programs may require wildly
different amounts of examples to build a useful model. For some relatively
simple problems, a few dozen examples might be sufficient. For other problems,
a trillion examples might be insufficient.
It's possible to get good results from a small dataset if you are adapting
an existing model already trained on large quantities of data from the
same schema.
Quality and reliability of data
Everyone prefers high quality to low quality, but quality is such a vague
concept that it could be defined many different ways. This course defines
quality pragmatically:

A high-quality dataset helps your model accomplish its goal.
A low quality dataset inhibits your model from accomplishing its goal.

A high-quality dataset is usually also reliable.
Reliability refers to the degree to which you can trust your data.
A model trained on a reliable dataset is more likely to yield useful
predictions than a model trained on unreliable data.
In measuring reliability, you must determine:

How common are label errors? For example, if your data is
labeled by humans, how often did your human raters make mistakes?
Are your features noisy? That is, do the values in your features
contain errors? Be realistic—you can't purge your dataset
of all noise. Some noise is normal; for example, GPS measurements of any
location always fluctuate a little, week to week.
Is the data properly filtered for your problem? For example,
should your dataset include search queries from bots? If you're
building a spam-detection system, then likely the answer is yes.
However, if you're trying to improve search results for humans, then no.

The following are common causes of unreliable data in datasets:

Omitted values. For example, a person forgot to enter a value for a
house's age.
Duplicate examples. For example, a server mistakenly uploaded the same
log entries twice.
Bad feature values. For example, someone typed an extra digit, or a
thermometer was left out in the sun.
Bad labels. For example, a person mistakenly labeled a picture of an
oak tree as a maple tree.
Bad sections of data. For example, a certain feature is very reliable,
except for that one day when the network kept crashing.

We recommend using automation to flag unreliable data. For example,
unit tests that define or rely on an external formal data schema can
flag values that fall outside of a defined range.
Note: Any sufficiently large or diverse dataset almost certainly contains
outliers that fall outside your
data schema or unit test bands.
Determining how to handle outliers is an important part of machine learning.
The Numerical data
unit
details how to handle numeric outliers.
Complete vs. incomplete examples
In a perfect world, each example is complete; that is, each example contains
a value for each feature.



Figure 1. A complete example.
  

 
Unfortunately, real-world examples are often incomplete, meaning that at
least one feature value is missing.



Figure 2. An incomplete example.
  

 
Don't train a model on incomplete examples. Instead, fix or eliminate
incomplete examples by doing one of the following:

Delete incomplete examples.
Impute missing values;
that is, convert the incomplete example to a complete example by providing
well-reasoned guesses for the missing values.




Figure 3. Deleting incomplete examples from the dataset.
  

 



Figure 4. Imputing missing values for incomplete examples.
  

 
If the dataset contains enough complete examples to train a useful model,
then consider deleting the incomplete examples.
Similarly, if only one feature is missing a significant amount of data and that
one feature probably can't help the model much, then consider deleting
that feature from the model inputs and seeing how much quality is lost by its
removal. If the model works just or almost as well without it, that's great.
Conversely, if you don't have enough complete examples to train a useful model,
then you might consider imputing missing values.
It's fine to delete useless or redundant examples, but it's bad to delete
important examples. Unfortunately, it can be difficult to differentiate
between useless and useful examples. If you can't decide whether
to delete or impute, consider building two datasets: one formed by deleting
incomplete examples and the other by imputing.
Then, determine which dataset trains the better model.


Click the icon to learn more about imputation handling.



Clever algorithms can impute some pretty good missing values;
however, imputed values are rarely as good as the actual values.
Therefore, a good dataset tells the model which values are imputed and
which are actual. One way to do this is to add an extra Boolean column
to the dataset that indicates whether a particular feature's value
is imputed. For example, given a feature named temperature,
you could add an extra Boolean feature named something like
temperature_is_imputed. Then, during training, the model will
probably gradually learn to trust examples containing imputed values for
feature temperature less than examples containing
actual (non-imputed) values.





Imputation is the process of generating well-reasoned data, not random or
deceptive data. Be careful: good imputation can improve your model; bad
imputation can hurt your model.

One common algorithm is to use the mean or median as the imputed value.
Consequently, when you represent a numerical feature with
Z-scores, then
the imputed value is typically 0 (because 0 is generally the mean Z-score).
Exercise: Check your understanding

  A sorted dataset, like the one in the
  following exercise, can sometimes simplify imputation. However,
  it is a bad idea to train on a sorted dataset. So, after
  imputation, randomize the order of examples in the training set.

Here are two columns of a dataset sorted by Timestamp.

Timestamp Temperature
June 8, 2023 09:00 12
June 8, 2023 10:00 18
June 8, 2023 11:00 missing
June 8, 2023 12:00 24
June 8, 2023 13:00 38




Which of the following would be a reasonable value to impute
          for the missing value of Temperature?


23
Probably. 23 is the mean of the adjacent values (12, 18, 24, and 38).
           However, we aren't seeing the rest of the dataset, so it is possible
           that 23 would be an outlier for 11:00 on other days. 


31
Unlikely. The limited part of the dataset that we can see suggests
           that 31 is much too high for the 11:00 Temperature. However,
           we can't be sure without basing the imputation on a larger number of
           examples.


51
Very unlikely. 51 is much higher than any of the displayed values
           (and, therefore, much higher than the mean).



Key terms:

Dataset
Embedding vector
Example
Feature
Model
Value imputation
Z-score normalization

This document explains the differences between direct and proxy labels for machine learning models, highlighting that direct labels are preferred but often unavailable.


It emphasizes the importance of carefully evaluating proxy labels to ensure they are a suitable approximation of the target prediction.


Human-generated data, while offering flexibility and nuanced understanding, can be expensive and prone to errors, requiring careful quality control.


Machine learning models can utilize a combination of automated and human-generated labels, but the added complexity of maintaining human-generated labels often outweighs the benefits.


Regardless of the label source, manual data inspection and comparison with human ratings are crucial for identifying potential issues and ensuring data quality.








This section focuses on labels.
Direct versus proxy labels
Consider two different kinds of labels:

Direct labels, which are labels identical to the prediction your model
is trying to make. That is, the prediction your model is trying to make is
exactly present as a column in your dataset.
For example, a column named bicycle owner would be a direct label for a
binary classification model that predicts whether or not a person owns
a bicycle.
Proxy labels, which are labels that are similar—but
not identical—to the prediction your model is trying to make.
For example, a person subscribing to Bicycle Bizarre magazine
probably—but not definitely—owns a bicycle.

Direct labels are generally better than proxy labels. If your dataset
provides a possible direct label, you should probably use it.
Oftentimes though, direct labels aren't available.
Proxy labels are always a compromise—an imperfect approximation of
a direct label. However, some proxy labels are close enough approximations
to be useful. Models that use proxy labels are only as useful as the
connection between the proxy label and the prediction.
Recall that every label must be represented as a floating-point number, similar
to the feature vector (because
machine learning is fundamentally just a collection of mathematical operations).
Sometimes, a direct label exists but can't be easily represented as
a floating-point number. In this case, use a proxy label.
Exercise: Check your understanding
Your company wants to do the following:

Mail coupons ("Get 15% off a new bicycle
helmet") to bicycle owners.

So, your model must do the following:

Predict which people own a bicycle.

Unfortunately, the dataset doesn't contain a column named bike owner.
However, the dataset does contain a column named recently bought a bicycle.


Would recently bought a bicycle be a good proxy label
         or a poor proxy label for this model?

Good proxy label
The column recently bought a bicycle is a
            relatively good proxy label. After all, most of the people
            who buy bicycles now own bicycles. Nevertheless, like all
            proxy labels, even very good ones, recently bought a
            bicycle is imperfect. After all, the person buying
            an item isn't always the person using (or owning) that item.
            For example, people sometimes buy bicycles as a gift.


Poor proxy label
Like all proxy labels, recently bought a bicycle
            is imperfect (some bicycles are bought as gifts and given to
            others). However, recently bought a bicycle is
            still a relatively good indicator that someone owns a
            bicycle.



Human-generated data
Some data is human-generated; that is, one or more humans examine some
information and provide a value, usually for the label. For example,
one or more meteorologists could examine pictures of the sky and identify
cloud types.
Alternatively, some data is automatically-generated. That is, software
(possibly, another machine learning model) determines the value. For example, a
machine learning model could examine sky pictures and automatically identify
cloud types.
This section explores the advantages and disadvantages of human-generated data.
Advantages

Human raters can perform a wide range of tasks that even sophisticated
machine learning models may find difficult.
The process forces the owner of the dataset to develop clear and
consistent criteria.

Disadvantages

You typically pay human raters, so human-generated data can be expensive.
To err is human. Therefore, multiple human raters might have to evaluate the
same data.

Think through these questions to determine your needs:

How skilled must your raters be? (For example, must the raters
know a specific language? Do you need linguists for dialogue or NLP
applications?)
How many labeled examples do you need? How soon do you need them?
What's your budget?

Always double-check your human raters. For example, label 1000 examples
yourself, and see how your results match other raters' results.
If discrepancies surface, don't assume your ratings are the correct ones,
especially if a value judgment is involved. If human raters have introduced
errors, consider adding instructions to help them and try again.


Click the plus icon to learn more about human-generated data.


Looking at your data by hand is a good exercise regardless of how you
obtained your data. Andrej Karpathy did this on
ImageNet
and wrote about the experience.

Models can train on a mix of automated and human-generated labels. However,
for most models, an extra set of human-generated labels (which can become stale)
are generally not worth the extra complexity and maintenance.
That said, sometimes the human-generated labels can provide extra
information not available in the automated labels.



Key terms:

Label
Feature vector

Imbalanced datasets occur when one label (majority class) is significantly more frequent than another (minority class), potentially hindering model training on the minority class.


Downsampling the majority class and upweighting it can improve model performance by balancing class representation and reducing prediction bias.


Experimenting with rebalancing ratios is crucial for optimal performance, ensuring batches contain enough minority class examples for effective training.


Upweighting the minority class is simpler but may increase prediction bias compared to downsampling and upweighting the majority class.


Downsampling offers benefits like faster convergence and less disk space usage but requires manual effort, especially for large datasets.








This section explores the following three questions:

What's the difference between class-balanced datasets and
class-imbalanced datasets?
Why is training an imbalanced dataset difficult?
How can you overcome the problems of training imbalanced datasets?

Class-balanced datasets versus class-imbalanced datasets
Consider a dataset containing a
categorical label whose value
is either the positive class or the negative class. In a
class-balanced dataset,
the number of positive classes
and negative classes is
about equal. For example, a dataset containing 235 positive classes and 247
negative classes is a balanced dataset.
In a class-imbalanced dataset,
one label is considerably more common than the other. In the real world,
class-imbalanced datasets are far more common than class-balanced datasets.
For example, in a dataset of credit card transactions, fraudulent purchases
might make up less than 0.1% of the examples. Similarly, in a medical diagnosis
dataset, the number of patients with a rare virus might be less than 0.01% of
the total examples. In a class-imbalanced dataset:

The more common label is called the
majority class.
The less common label is called the
minority class.

The difficulty of training severely class-imbalanced datasets
Training aims to create a model that successfully distinguishes the positive
class from the negative class. To do so,
batches need a sufficient
number of both positive classes and negative classes. That's not a problem
when training on a mildly class-imbalanced dataset since even small batches
typically contain sufficient examples of both the positive class and the
negative class. However, a severely class-imbalanced dataset might not contain
enough minority class examples for proper training.
For example, consider the class-imbalanced dataset illustrated in Figure 6
in which:

200 labels are in the majority class.
2 labels are in the minority class.




Figure 6. A highly imbalanced floral dataset containing far more
                     sunflowers than roses.
  

 
If the batch size is 20, most batches won't contain any examples of the minority
class. If the batch size is 100, each batch will contain an average of only one
minority class example, which is insufficient for proper training. Even a much
larger batch size will still yield such an imbalanced proportion that the model
might not train properly.
Note: Accuracy is usually a poor
      metric for assessing a model trained on a class-imbalanced dataset.
      See Classification: Accuracy, recall, precision, and related
      metrics
      for details.
Training a class-imbalanced dataset
During training, a model should learn two things:

What each class looks like; that is, what feature values correspond to
what class?
How common each class is; that is, what is the relative distribution of
the classes?

Standard training conflates these two goals. In contrast, the following two-step
technique called downsampling and upweighting the majority class separates
these two goals, enabling the model to achieve both goals.
Note: Many students read the following section and say some variant of,
      "That just can't be right." Be warned that downsampling and upweighting
      the majority class is somewhat counterintuitive.
Step 1: Downsample the majority class
Downsampling means training
on a disproportionately low percentage of majority class examples.
That is, you artificially force a class-imbalanced dataset to become
somewhat more balanced by omitting many of the majority class examples from
training. Downsampling greatly increases the probability that each batch
contains enough examples of the minority class to train the model properly
and efficiently.
For example, the class-imbalanced dataset shown in Figure 6 consists of
99% majority class and 1% minority class examples. Downsampling the majority
class by a factor of 25 artificially creates a more balanced training set
(80% majority class to 20% minority class) suggested in Figure 7:



Figure 7. Downsampling the majority class by a factor of 25.
  

 
Step 2: Upweight the downsampled class
Downsampling introduces a
prediction bias
by showing the model an artificial world where the classes are more balanced
than in the real world. To correct this bias, you must "upweight" the majority
classes by the factor to which you downsampled. Upweighting means treating the
loss on a majority class example more harshly than the loss on a minority
class example.
For example, we downsampled the majority class by a factor of 25, so we must
upweight the majority class by a factor of 25. That is, when the model
mistakenly predicts the majority class, treat the loss as if it were 25 errors
(multiply the regular loss by 25).



Figure 8. Upweighting the majority class by a factor of 25.
  

 
How much should you downsample and upweight to rebalance your dataset?
To determine the answer, you should experiment with different downsampling
and upweighting factors just as you would experiment with other
hyperparameters.
Benefits of this technique
Downsampling and upweighting the majority class brings the following benefits:

Better model: The resultant model "knows" both of the following:

The connection between features and labels
The true distribution of the classes

Faster convergence: During training, the model sees the minority
class more often, which helps the model converge faster.

Key terms:

Batch
Class-balanced dataset
Class-imbalanced dataset
Dataset
Downsampling
Hyperparameter
Majority class
Minority class
Prediction bias
Upweighting

Machine learning models should be tested against a separate dataset, called the test set, to ensure accurate predictions on unseen data.


It's recommended to split the dataset into three subsets: training, validation, and test sets, with the validation set used for initial testing during training and the test set used for final evaluation.


The validation and test sets can "wear out" with repeated use, requiring fresh data to maintain reliable evaluation results.


A good test set is statistically significant, representative of the dataset and real-world data, and contains no duplicates from the training set.


It's crucial to address discrepancies between the dataset used for training and testing and the real-world data the model will encounter to achieve satisfactory real-world performance.








All good software engineering projects devote considerable energy to
testing their apps. Similarly, we strongly recommend testing your
ML model to determine the correctness of its predictions.
Training, validation, and test sets
You should test a model against a different set of examples than those
used to train the model. As you'll learn
a little later, testing
on different examples is stronger proof of your model's fitness than testing
on the same set of examples.
Where do you get those different examples? Traditionally in machine learning,
you get those different examples by splitting the original dataset. You might
assume, therefore, that you should split the original dataset into two subsets:

A training set
that the model trains on.
A test set for evaluation of the
trained model.




Figure 8. Not an optimal split.
  

 
Exercise: Check your intuition


Suppose you train on the training set and evaluate on the test set
       over multiple rounds. In each round, you use the test set results
       to guide how to update hyperparameters and the feature set. Can you
       see anything wrong with this approach? Pick only one answer.

Doing many rounds of this procedure might cause the model
         to implicitly fit the peculiarities of the test set. 
Yes! The more often you use the same test set,
          the more likely the model closely fits the test set.
           Like a teacher "teaching to the test," the model inadvertently
           fits the test set, which might make it harder for the model
           to fit real-world data.


This approach is fine. After all, you're training on the
           training set and evaluating on a separate test set.
Actually, there's a subtle issue here. Think about what might
           gradually go wrong.


This approach is computationally inefficient. Don't change
           hyperparameters or feature sets after each round of testing.
Frequent testing is expensive but critical. However, frequent
           testing is far less expensive than additional training. Optimizing
           hyperparameters and the feature set can dramatically improve
           model quality, so always budget time and computational resources
           to work on these.



Dividing the dataset into two sets is a decent idea, but
a better approach is to divide the dataset into three subsets.
In addition to the training set and the test set, the third subset is:

A validation set
performs the initial testing on the model as it is being trained.




Figure 9. A much better split.
  

Use the validation set to evaluate results from the training set.
After repeated use of the validation set suggests that your model is
making good predictions, use the test set to double-check your model.
The following figure suggests this workflow.
In the figure, "Tweak model" means adjusting anything about the model
—from changing the learning rate, to adding or removing
features, to designing a completely new model from scratch.



Figure 10. A good workflow for development and testing.
  

Note: When you transform a feature in your training set, you must make the
same transformation in the validation set, test set, and real-world dataset.
The workflow shown in Figure 10 is optimal, but even with that workflow,
test sets and validation sets still "wear out" with repeated use.
That is, the more you use the same data to make decisions about
hyperparameter settings or other model improvements, the less confidence
that the model will make good predictions on new data.
For this reason, it's a good idea to collect more data to "refresh" the test
set and validation set. Starting anew is a great reset.
Exercise: Check your intuition


You shuffled all the examples in the dataset and divided
         the shuffled examples into training, validation, and test
         sets. However, the loss value on your test set is so staggeringly low
         that you suspect a mistake. What might have gone wrong?

Many of the examples in the test set are duplicates of examples
           in the training set.
Yes. This can be a problem in a dataset with a lot of redundant
           examples. We strongly recommend deleting duplicate examples from
           the test set before testing.


Training and testing are nondeterministic. Sometimes, by chance,
           your test loss is incredibly low. Rerun the test to confirm the
           result.
Although loss does vary a little on each run, it shouldn't vary so
           much that you think you won the machine learning lottery.


By chance, the test set just happened to contain examples that the
           model performed well on.
The examples were well shuffled, so this is extremely unlikely.



Additional problems with test sets
As the previous question illustrates, duplicate examples can affect model evaluation.
After splitting a dataset into training, validation, and test sets,
delete any examples in the validation set or test set that are duplicates of
examples in the training set. The only fair test of a model is against
new examples, not duplicates.
For example, consider a model that predicts whether an email is spam, using
the subject line, email body, and sender's email address as features.
Suppose you divide the data into training and test sets, with an 80-20 split.
After training, the model achieves 99% precision on both the training set and
the test set. You'd probably expect a lower precision on the test set, so you
take another look at the data and discover that many of the examples in the test
set are duplicates of examples in the training set. The problem is that you
neglected to scrub duplicate entries for the same spam email from your input
database before splitting the data. You've inadvertently trained on some of
your test data.
In summary, a good test set or validation set meets all of the
following criteria:

Large enough to yield statistically significant testing results.
Representative of the dataset as a whole. In other words, don't pick
a test set with different characteristics than the training set.
Representative of the real-world data that the model will encounter
as part of its business purpose.
Zero examples duplicated in the training set.

Exercises: Check your understanding


Given a single dataset with a fixed number of examples,
         which of the following statements is true?

Every example used in testing the model is one less example used
           in training the model.
Dividing examples into train/test/validation sets is a zero-sum game.
           This is the central trade-off.


The number of examples in the test set must be greater than
           the number of examples in the validation set.
In theory, the validation set and test test should contain the same
           number of examples or nearly so. 


The number of examples in the test set must be greater than
           the number of examples in the validation set or training set.
The number of examples in the training set is usually greater than
           the number of examples in the validation set or test set; however,
           there are no percentage requirements for the different sets.





Suppose your test set contains enough examples to perform a
         statistically significant test. Furthermore, testing against
         the test set yields low loss. However, the model performed
         poorly in the real world. What should you do?

Determine how the original dataset differs from real-life data.
Yes. Even the best datasets are only a snapshot of real-life data;
           the underlying
           ground truth
           tends to change over time. Although your test set matched your
           training set well enough to suggest good model quality, your
           dataset probably doesn't adequately match real-world data.
           You might have to retrain and retest against a new dataset.


Retest on the same test set. The test results might have
           been an anomaly.
Although retesting might yield slightly different results,
           this tactic probably isn't very helpful.





How many examples should the test set contain?

Enough examples to yield a statistically significant test.
Yes. How many examples is that? You'll need to experiment.


At least 15% of the original dataset.
15% may or may not be enough examples.



Key terms:

Test set
Training set
Validation set

Machine learning models require all data, including features like street names, to be transformed into numerical (floating-point) representations for training.


Normalization is crucial for optimizing model training by converting existing floating-point features to a specific range.


When dealing with large datasets, selecting a relevant subset of data for training is essential for model performance.


Protecting user privacy by excluding Personally Identifiable Information (PII) from datasets is a critical consideration.








Machine learning models can only train on floating-point values.
However, many dataset features are not naturally floating-point values.
Therefore, one important part of machine learning is transforming
non-floating-point features to floating-point representations.
For example, suppose street names is a feature. Most street names
are strings, such as "Broadway" or "Vilakazi".
Your model can't train on "Broadway", so you must transform "Broadway"
to a floating-point number. The Categorical Data
module
explains how to do this.
Additionally, you should even transform most floating-point features.
This transformation process, called
normalization, converts
floating-point numbers to a constrained range that improves model training.
The Numerical Data
module
explains how to do this.
Sample data when you have too much of it
Some organizations are blessed with an abundance of data.

When the dataset contains too many examples, you must select a subset
of examples for training. When possible, select the subset that is most
relevant to your model's predictions.


Filter examples containing PII
Good datasets omit examples containing Personally Identifiable Information
(PII). This policy helps safeguard privacy but can influence the model.
See the Safety and Privacy module later in the course for more on these topics.
Key terms:

Normalization

Imagine you're a visitor from a faraway galaxy.
You're excited to go sightseeing and make new friends.
But you don't speak the language and your translator app
isn't much help.
How are you going to communicate, you wonder?
Then you have an idea.
You find a bustling local community
and listen for a few months so you can learn the language
from native speakers.
After a few months of language immersion,
you finally feel ready to communicate.
Uh oh.
What went wrong?
Clearly, your language skills are not as good
as you thought they were.
They didn't translate to the real world.
Machine learning models can have the same problem.
When you train a model on data, you're
teaching it to perform well on that specific set of data.
But this training data is just a small subset of real world data.
If the model makes high quality predictions on the training data
but much lower quality predictions on brand new data,
then the model didn't generalize.
In this case, we say that the model
has overfit the training data.
It has been tuned so closely to the specific patterns
of the data it's already seen that it can't identify patterns
in new data.
Realizing your mistake, overfitting
to the speech patterns of only a small group of people,
you begin your language studies again,
but this time you broaden your approach,
listening to a wide variety of speakers.
Your communication skills now successfully generalize
to brand new contexts.
And you land an exciting new job sharing your knowledge
with others.


Overfitting occurs when a model performs well on training data but poorly on new, unseen data.


A model is considered to generalize well if it accurately predicts on new data, indicating it hasn't overfit.


Overfitting can be detected by observing diverging loss curves for training and validation sets on a generalization curve.


Common causes of overfitting include unrepresentative training data and overly complex models.


Dataset conditions for good generalization include examples being independent, identically distributed, and stationary, with similar distributions across partitions.








Overfitting means creating a model
that matches (memorizes) the
training set so
closely that the model fails to make correct predictions on new data.
An overfit model is analogous to an invention that performs well in the lab but
is worthless in the real world.
Tip:
Overfitting is a common problem in machine learning, not an academic
hypothetical.

In Figure 11, imagine that each geometric shape represents a tree's position
in a square forest. The blue diamonds mark the locations of healthy trees,
while the orange circles mark the locations of sick trees.



Figure 11. Training set: locations of healthy and sick trees in a square forest.
  

 
Mentally draw any shapes—lines, curves, ovals...anything—to separate the
healthy trees from the sick trees. Then, expand the next line to examine
one possible separation.


Expand to see one possible solution (Figure 12).





Figure 12. A complex model for distinguishing sick from healthy trees.
  

 


The complex shapes shown in Figure 12 successfully categorized all but two of
the trees. If we think of the shapes as a model, then this is a fantastic
model.
Or is it? A truly excellent model successfully categorizes new examples.
Figure 13 shows what happens when that same model makes predictions on new
examples from the test set:



Figure 13.Test set: a complex model for distinguishing sick from healthy trees.
  

 
So, the complex model shown in Figure 12 did a great job on the training set
but a pretty bad job on the test set. This is a classic case of a model
overfitting to the training set data.
Fitting, overfitting, and underfitting
A model must make good predictions on new data.
That is, you're aiming to create a model that "fits" new data.
As you've seen, an overfit model makes excellent predictions on the training
set but poor predictions on new data. An
underfit model
doesn't even make good predictions on the training data. If an overfit model is
like a product that performs well in the lab but poorly in the real world,
then an underfit model is like a product that doesn't even do well in
the lab.



Figure 14. Underfit, fit, and overfit models.
  

 
Generalization is the
opposite of overfitting. That is, a model that generalizes well makes good
predictions on new data. Your goal is to create a model that generalizes
well to new data.
Detecting overfitting
The following curves help you detect overfitting:

loss curves
generalization curves

A loss curve plots a model's loss
against the number of training iterations.
A graph that shows two or more loss curves is called a generalization
curve. The following
generalization curve shows two loss curves:



Figure 15. A generalization curve that strongly implies overfitting.
  

 
Notice that the two loss curves behave similarly at first and then diverge.
That is, after a certain number of iterations, loss declines or
holds steady (converges) for the training set, but increases
for the validation set. This suggests overfitting.
In contrast, a generalization curve for a well-fit model shows two loss curves
that have similar shapes.
What causes overfitting?
Very broadly speaking, overfitting is caused by one or both of the following
problems:

The training set doesn't adequately represent real life data (or the
validation set or test set).
The model is too complex.

Generalization conditions
A model trains on a training set, but the real test of a model's worth is how
well it makes predictions on new examples, particularly on real-world data.
While developing a model, your test set serves as a proxy for real-world data.
Training a model that generalizes well implies the following dataset conditions:

Examples must be
independently and identically distributed,
which is a fancy way of saying that your
examples can't influence each other.
The dataset is
stationary, meaning the
dataset doesn't change significantly over time.
The dataset partitions have the same distribution.
That is, the examples in the training set are statistically similar to the
examples in the validation set, test set, and real-world data.

Explore the preceding conditions through the following exercises.
Exercises: Check your understanding


Consider the following dataset partitions.
         


         What should you do to ensure that the examples in the training set
         have a similar statistical distribution to the examples in
         the validation set and the test set?

Shuffle the examples in the dataset extensively before
           partitioning them.
Yes. Good shuffling of examples makes partitions much more
           likely to be statistically similar.


Sort the examples from earliest to most recent.
If the examples in the dataset are not stationary, then
           sorting makes the partitions less
           similar.


Do nothing. Given enough examples, the law of averages
           naturally ensures that the distributions will be
           statistically similar.
Unfortunately, this is not the case. The examples
           in certain sections of the dataset may differ from those in other
           sections. 





A streaming service is developing a model to predict the popularity
         of potential new television shows for the next three years. The
         streaming service plans to train the model on a dataset
         containing hundreds of millions of examples, spanning the previous
         ten years. Will this model encounter a problem?

Probably. Viewers' tastes change in ways that past behavior can't
           predict.
Yes. Viewer tastes are not stationary. They constantly change.


Definitely not. The dataset is large enough to make good
           predictions.
Unfortunately, viewers' tastes are nonstationary.


Probably not. Viewers' tastes change in predictably cyclical ways.
           Ten years of data will enable the model to make good predictions
           on future trends.
Although certain aspects of entertainment are somewhat cyclical, a
           model trained from past entertainment history will almost certainly
           have trouble making predictions about the next few years.





A model aims to predict the time it takes for people to walk a mile
         based on weather data (temperature, dew point, and
         precipitation) collected over one year in a city whose weather varies
         significantly by season. Can you build and test a model from this
         dataset, even though the weather readings change dramatically by
         season?
         

Yes
Yes, it is possible to build and test a model from this dataset.
           You just have to ensure that the data is partitioned equally, so
           that data from all four seasons is distributed equally into the
           different partitions.


No
Assuming this dataset contains enough examples of temperature, dew
            point, and precipitation, then you can build and test a model from
            this dataset. You just have to ensure that the data is partitioned
            equally, so that data from all four seasons is distributed equally
            into the different partitions.



Challenge exercise
You are creating a model that predicts the ideal date for riders to buy a
train ticket for a particular route. For example, the model might recommend
that users buy their ticket on July 8 for a train that departs July 23.
The train company updates prices hourly, basing their updates on a variety
of factors but mainly on the current number of available seats. That is:

If a lot of seats are available, ticket prices are typically low.
If very few seats are available, ticket prices are typically high.



Your model exhibits low
  loss on the validation set and the test set but sometimes makes
  terrible predictions on real-world data. Why?

Click here to see the answer

Answer: The real world model is struggling with a
      feedback loop.
For example, suppose the model recommends that users buy tickets on July 8.
      Some riders who use the model's recommendation buy their tickets at 8:30
      in the morning on July 8. At 9:00, the train company raises prices because
      fewer seats are now available. Riders using the model's recommendation have
      altered prices. By evening, ticket prices might be much higher than in the
      morning.




Key terms:

Feedback loop
Generalization
Generalization curve
Independently and identically distributed (i.i.d)
Loss curve
Overfitting
Stationarity
Training set
Underfitting

Simpler models often generalize better to new data than complex models, even if they perform slightly worse on training data.


Occam's Razor favors simpler explanations and models, prioritizing them over more complex ones.


Regularization techniques help prevent overfitting by penalizing model complexity during training.


Model training aims to minimize both loss (errors on training data) and complexity for optimal performance on new data.


Model complexity can be quantified using functions of model weights, like L1 and L2 regularization.








The previous unit introduced the following model, which miscategorized a lot
of trees in the test set:



Figure 16. The misbehaving complex model from the previous unit.
  

The preceding model contains a lot of complex shapes. Would a simpler
model handle new data better? Suppose you replace the complex model with
a ridiculously simple model--a straight line.



Figure 17. A much simpler model.
  

The simple model generalizes better than the complex model on new data. That is,
the simple model made better predictions on the test set than the complex model.
Simplicity has been beating complexity for a long time. In fact, the
preference for simplicity dates back to ancient Greece. Centuries later,
a fourteenth-century friar named William of Occam formalized the preference
for simplicity in a philosophy known as Occam's
razor. This philosophy
remains an essential underlying principle of many sciences, including
machine learning.
Note: Complex models typically outperform simple models on the training set.
However, simple models typically outperform complex models on the test set
(which is more important).
Exercises: Check your understanding


You are developing a physics equation. Which of the following formulas
         conform more closely to Occam's Razor?

A formula with three variables.
Three variables is more Occam-friendly than twelve variables.


A formula with twelve variables.
Twelve variables seems overly complicated, doesn't it?
           The two most famous physics formulas of all time (F=ma and
           E=mc2) each involve only three variables.





You're on a brand-new machine learning project, about to select your
      first features. How many features should you pick?

Pick 1–3 features that seem to have strong predictive power.
It's best for your data collection pipeline to start with only one or
        two features. This will help you confirm that the ML model works as intended.
        Also, when you build a baseline from a couple of features,
        you'll feel like you're making progress!


Pick 4–6 features that seem to have strong predictive power.
You might eventually use this many features, but it's still better to
        start with fewer. Fewer features usually means fewer unnecessary
        complications.


Pick as many features as you can, so you can start observing which
        features have the strongest predictive power.
Start smaller. Every new feature adds a new dimension to your training
        dataset. When the dimensionality increases, the volume of the space
        increases so fast that the available training data become sparse. The
        sparser your data, the harder it is for a model to learn the relationship
        between the features that actually matter and the label. This phenomenon
        is called "the curse of dimensionality."



Regularization
Machine learning models must simultaneously meet two conflicting goals:

Fit data well.
Fit data as simply as possible.

One approach to keeping a model simple is to penalize complex models; that is,
to force the model to become simpler during training. Penalizing complex
models is one form of regularization.

A regularization analogy:
Suppose every student in a lecture hall had a little buzzer that emitted
a sound that annoyed the professor.
Students would press the buzzer whenever the professor's lecture became too
complicated. Annoyed, the professor would be forced to simplify the lecture.
The professor would complain, "When I simplify, I'm not being precise enough."
The students would counter with, "The only goal is to explain it simply
enough that I understand it." Gradually, the buzzers would train the professor
to give an appropriately simple lecture, even if the simpler lecture isn't as
sufficiently precise.

Loss and complexity
So far, this course has suggested that the only goal when training was to
minimize loss; that is:

$$\text{minimize(loss)}$$

As you've seen, models focused solely on minimizing loss tend to overfit.
A better training optimization algorithm minimizes some combination of
loss and complexity:

$$\text{minimize(loss + complexity)}$$

Unfortunately, loss and complexity are typically inversely related. As
complexity increases, loss decreases. As complexity decreases, loss increases.
You should find a reasonable middle ground where the model makes good
predictions on both the training data and real-world data.
That is, your model should find a reasonable compromise
between loss and complexity.
What is complexity?
You've already seen a few different ways of quantifying loss. How would
you quantify complexity? Start your exploration through the following exercise:
Exercise: Check your intuition


So far, we've been pretty vague about what complexity actually
         is. Which of the following ideas do you think would be reasonable
         complexity metrics?

Complexity is a function of the model's weights.
Yes, this is one way to measure some models' complexity.
           This metric is called
           
L1 regularization.


Complexity is a function of the square of the model's weights.
Yes, you can measure some models' complexity this way. This metric
           is called
           
L2 regularization.


Complexity is a function of the biases of all the features in the
           model.
Bias doesn't measure complexity.



Key terms:

L1 regularization
L2 regularization
Regularization

L2 regularization is a technique used to reduce model complexity and prevent overfitting by penalizing large weights.


A regularization rate (lambda) controls the strength of regularization, with higher values leading to simpler models and lower values increasing the risk of overfitting.


Early stopping is an alternative regularization method that involves ending training before the model fully converges to prevent overfitting.


Finding the right balance between learning rate and regularization rate is crucial for optimal model performance, as they influence weights in opposite directions.








L2 regularization
is a popular regularization metric, which uses the following formula:

$$L_2\text{ regularization } = {w_1^2 + w_2^2 + ... + w_n^2}$$

For example, the following table shows the calculation of L2
regularization for a model with six weights:

  Value Squared value
w1 0.2 0.04
w2 -0.5 0.25
w3 5.0 25.0
w4 -1.2 1.44
w5 0.3 0.09
w6 -0.1 0.01
    26.83 = total

Notice that weights close to zero don't affect L2 regularization
much, but large weights can have a huge impact. For example, in the
preceding calculation:

A single weight (w3) contributes about 93% of the
total complexity.
The other five weights collectively contribute only about 7% of the
total complexity.

L2 regularization encourages weights toward 0, but never pushes
weights all the way to zero.
Exercises: Check your understanding


If you use L2 regularization while training a model, what
         will typically happen to the overall complexity of the model?

The overall complexity of the system will probably drop.
Since L2 regularization encourages weights towards 0,
           the overall complexity will probably drop.


The overall complexity of the model will probably stay
           constant.
This is very unlikely.


The overall complexity of the model will probably increase.
This is unlikely. Remember that L2 regularization
           encourages weights towards 0.





If you use L2 regularization while training a model,
         some features will be removed from the model.

True
Although L2 regularization may make some weights very
           small, it will never push any weights all the way to zero.
           Consequently, all features will still contribute something to
           the model.


False
L2 regularization never pushes weights all the way to
           zero.



Regularization rate (lambda)
As noted, training attempts to minimize some combination of loss and complexity:

$$\text{minimize(loss} + \text{ complexity)}$$

Model developers tune the overall impact of complexity on model training
by multiplying its value by a scalar called the
regularization rate.
The Greek character lambda typically symbolizes the regularization rate.
That is, model developers aim to do the following:

$$\text{minimize(loss} + \lambda \text{ complexity)}$$

A high regularization rate:

Strengthens the influence of regularization, thereby reducing the chances of
overfitting.
Tends to produce a histogram of model weights having the following
characteristics:

a normal distribution
a mean weight of 0.


A low regularization rate:

Lowers the influence of regularization, thereby increasing the chances of
overfitting.
Tends to produce a histogram of model weights with a flat distribution.

For example, the histogram of model weights for a high regularization rate
might look as shown in Figure 18.



Figure 18. Weight histogram for a high regularization rate.
                      Mean is zero. Normal distribution.
  

 
In contrast, a low regularization rate tends to yield a flatter histogram, as
shown in Figure 19.



Figure 19. Weight histogram for a low regularization rate.
                      Mean may or may not be zero.
  

 
Note: Setting the regularization rate to zero removes regularization completely.
In this case, training focuses exclusively on minimizing loss, which
poses the highest possible overfitting risk.
Picking the regularization rate
The ideal regularization rate produces a model that generalizes well to
new, previously unseen data.
Unfortunately, that ideal value is data-dependent,
so you must do some

tuning.


Early stopping: an alternative to complexity-based regularization
Early stopping is a
regularization method that doesn't involve a calculation of complexity.
Instead, early stopping simply means ending training before the model
fully converges. For example, you end training when the loss curve
for the validation set starts to increase (slope becomes positive).
Although early stopping usually increases training loss, it can decrease
test loss.
Early stopping is a quick, but rarely optimal, form of regularization.
The resulting model is very unlikely to be as good as a model trained
thoroughly on the ideal regularization rate.
Finding equilibrium between learning rate and regularization rate
Learning rate and
regularization rate tend to move weights in opposite
directions. A high learning rate often pulls weights away from zero;
a high regularization rate pushes weights towards zero.
If the regularization rate is high with respect to the learning rate,
the weak weights tend to produce a model that makes poor predictions.
Conversely, if the learning rate is high with respect to the regularization
rate, the strong weights tend to produce an overfit model.
Your goal is to find the equilibrium between learning rate and
regularization rate. This can be challenging. Worst of all, once you find
that elusive balance, you may have to ultimately change the learning rate.
And, when you change the learning rate, you'll again have to find the ideal
regularization rate.
Key terms:

Early stopping
L1 regularization
L2 regularization
Learning rate
Regularization
Regularization rate

This document helps you understand and interpret Machine Learning loss curves through a series of exercises and visual examples.


You will learn how to identify common issues like oscillating loss, exploding loss, overfitting, and erratic behavior in your models.


Solutions are provided for each exercise, along with explanations for various loss curve patterns.


Techniques to address these issues are discussed, including adjusting learning rate, cleaning training data, and applying regularization.


A glossary of key Machine Learning terminology related to loss curves and model training is included for quick reference.








Machine learning would be much simpler if all your
loss curves
looked like this the first time you trained your model:



Figure 20. An ideal loss curve.
  

Unfortunately, loss curves are often challenging to interpret. Use your
intuition about loss curves to solve the exercises on this page.
Exercise 1: Oscillating loss curve



Figure 21. Oscillating loss curve.
  



What three things could you do to try improve the loss curve
         shown in Figure 21?

Check your data against a data schema to detect bad examples, and
           then remove the bad examples from the training set.
Yes, this is a good practice for all models.
           


Reduce the learning rate.
           
Yes, reducing learning rate is often a good idea when debugging a
           training problem.
           


Reduce the training set to a tiny number of trustworthy examples.
           
Although this technique sounds artificial, it is actually a good
           idea. Assuming that the model converges on the small set of
           trustworthy examples, you can then gradually add more examples,
           perhaps discovering which examples cause the loss curve to
           oscillate.


Increase the number of examples in the training set.
           
This is a tempting idea, but it is extremely unlikely to fix
           the problem.


Increase the learning rate.
           
In general, avoid increasing the learning rate when a model's
           learning curve indicates a problem.



Exercise 2. Loss curve with a sharp jump



Figure 22. Sharp rise in loss.
  



Which two of the following statements identify possible
         reasons for the exploding loss shown in Figure 22?

The input data contains one or more NaNs—for example, a value
           caused by a division by zero.
This is more common than you might expect.
           


The input data contains a burst of outliers.
           
Sometimes, due to improper shuffling of batches, a batch might
           contain a lot of outliers.


The learning rate is too low.
           
A very low learning rate might increase training time, but it is
           not the cause of the strange loss curve.


The regularization rate is too high.
           
True, a very high regularization could prevent a model from
           converging; however, it won't cause the strange loss curve
           shown in Figure 22.



Exercise 3. Test loss diverges from training loss



Figure 23. Sharp rise in validation loss.
  



Which one of the following statements best identifies the
         reason for this difference between the loss curves of the training
         and test sets?

The model is overfitting the training set.
           
Yes, it probably is. Possible solutions:
           
Make the model simpler, possibly by reducing the number
                 of features.
Increase the regularization rate.
Ensure that the training set and test set are statistically
                 equivalent.



The learning rate is too high.
           
If the learning rate were too high, the loss curve for the training set
           would likely not have behaved as it did.
           



Exercise 4. Loss curve gets stuck



Figure 24. Chaotic loss after a certain number of steps.
  



Which one of the following statements is the most likely
         explanation for the erratic loss curve shown in Figure 24?
        

The training set is not shuffled well.
           
This is a possibility. For example, a training set that contains 100
      images of dogs followed by 100 images of cats may cause loss
      to oscillate as the model trains. Ensure that you shuffle
      examples sufficiently.


The regularization rate is too high.
           
This is unlikely to be the cause.
           


The training set contains too many features.
           
This is unlikely to be the cause.
           



Key terms:

Batch
Example
Feature
Learning rate
Loss curve
Outliers
Overfitting
Regularization
Regularization rate
Test set
Training set
Validation set