Physics Informed Deep Learning (Part I): Data-driven
Solutions of Nonlinear Partial Differential EquationsMaziar Raissi1, Paris Perdikaris2, and George Em Karniadakis11Division of Applied Mathematics, Brown University,
Providence, RI, 02912, USA2Department of Mechanical Engineering and Applied Mechanics,
University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USAAbstractWe introduce physics informed neural networks – neural networks that
are trained to solve supervised learning tasks while respecting any given law
of physics described by general nonlinear partial differential equations. In
this two part treatise, we present our developments in the context of solving
two main classes of problems: data-driven solution and data-driven discovery
of partial differential equations. Depending on the nature and arrangement
of the available data, we devise two distinct classes of algorithms, namely
continuous time and discrete time models. The resulting neural networks
form a new class of data-efficient universal function approximators that naturally encode any underlying physical laws as prior information. In this first
part, we demonstrate how these networks can be used to infer solutions to
partial differential equations, and obtain physics-informed surrogate models
that are fully differentiable with respect to all input coordinates and free
parameters.Keywords: Data-driven scientific computing, Machine learning, Predictive
modeling, Runge-Kutta methods, Nonlinear dynamics1. IntroductionWith the explosive growth of available data and computing resources, recent advances in machine learning and data analytics have yielded transformative results across diverse scientific disciplines, including image recognition
[1], natural language processing [2], cognitive science [3], and genomics [4].Preprint submitted to Journal Name November 30, 2017arXiv:1711.10561v1 [cs.AI] 28 Nov 20170.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0t−1.0−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0xu(t, x)−1.00−0.75−0.50−0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75−1 0 1x−1.00−0.75−0.50−0.25
0.00u(t, x)t = 0.10Data−1 0 1x−1.0−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0u(t, x)t = 0.90Exact PredictionFigure 4: Allen-Cahn equation: Top: Solution u(t, x) along with the location of the initial
training snapshot at t = 0.1 and the final prediction snapshot at t = 0.9. Bottom: Initial
training data and final prediction at the snapshots depicted by the white vertical lines in
the top panel. The relative L2 error for this case is 6.99 · 10−3.physical laws that govern a given data-set, and can be described by partial differential equations. In this work, we design data-driven algorithms for
inferring solutions to general nonlinear partial differential equations, and constructing computationally efficient physics-informed surrogate models. The
resulting methods showcase a series of promising results for a diverse collection of problems in computational science, and open the path for endowing
deep learning with the powerful capacity of mathematical physics to model
the world around us. As deep learning technology is continuing to grow
rapidly both in terms of methodological and algorithmic developments, we
believe that this is a timely contribution that can benefit practitioners across
19a wide range of scientific domains. Specific applications that can readily enjoy these benefits include, but are not limited to, data-driven forecasting of
physical processes, model predictive control, multi-physics/multi-scale modeling and simulation.
We must note however that the proposed methods should not be viewed
as replacements of classical numerical methods for solving partial differential equations (e.g., finite elements, spectral methods, etc.). Such methods
have matured over the last 50 years and, in many cases, meet the robustness
and computational efficiency standards required in practice. Our message
here, as advocated in Section 3, is that classical methods such as the RungeKutta time-stepping schemes can coexist in harmony with deep neural networks, and offer invaluable intuition in constructing structured predictive
algorithms. Moreover, the implementation simplicity of the latter greatly
favors rapid development and testing of new ideas, potentially opening the
path for a new era in data-driven scientific computing. This will be further
highlighted in the second part of this paper in which physics informed neural
networks are put to the test of data-driven discovery of partial differential
equations.
Finally, in terms of future work, one pressing question involves addressing
the problem of quantifying the uncertainty associated with the neural network predictions. Although this important element was naturally addressed
in previous work employing Gaussian processes [9], it not captured by the
proposed methodology in its present form and requires further investigation