We propose a general and complete classification of all
possible new and old kinds of surface plasmon waves
that can propagate at boundaries of arbitrary linear,
local bi-anisotropic media, including the quartic
metamaterials. For arbitrary frequency, wavelength,
propagation direction, penetration depths and fields of
the proposed surface plasmon waves we found the
dispersion condition and determined the 72-parametric
class of media that support a particular surface plasmon.
A member of each class is a pair of anisotropic materials
without magnetoelectric couplings.In this letter we introduce a new broad class of surface
electromagnetic waves, which propagate at interfaces of arbitrary
bi-anisotropic media with magnetoelectric coupling, which
includes the quartic metamaterials [1]. Surface electromagnetic
waves have been studied since the time of Sommerfeld [2] and
Zenneck [3]. Zenneck’s solution of Maxwell’s equations is based onmatching of evanescent waves at a planar boundary of two media
and was originally applied to the interface between earth and air.
Later it was realized by Fano [4], Ritchie [5] and Stern [6] that
Zenneck’s solution describes the surface plasmon polaritons atmetal-dielectric interfaces. Generally speaking, Zenneck waves
correspond to a broad family of surface polariton waves at
boundaries of isotropic media [7]. With the advent of
metamaterials and photonic crystals the design of custom
anisotropic media became possible and more complex surface
electromagnetic waves became of interest, such as D’yakonov
waves [8-12], optical Tamm waves [13-19], Dyakonov-Tamm
modes [20-22], and hyperbolic Tamm plasmons [23,24].The attention to new metamaterials is driven by the possibilities
of novel optical effects, such as negative refraction, hyperbolic
dispersion, optical magnetism non-reciprocity etc [25,26], and is
following the trajectory of increasing complexity of the effective
media that describe these metamaterials [27]. Nevertheless in
most cases the effective media under consideration are described
by at most 9 parameters [11,28,29]. Recently we made the next
logical step in this development and considered the most general
linear, local bi-anisotropic metamaterials with k-surfaces
described by 4th order polynomials in k-vector components, i.e.
quartic metamaterials [1]. We have shown that quartic media
support plane waves with arbitrary polarization and wavelength
and that the 36 effective medium parameters can be retrieved
from the amplitudes and k-vectors of 6 plane waves propagating in
the medium [1]. In this letter we predict that a boundary between
two quartic metamaterials supports a new kind of surface
electromagnetic waves, if the condition we provide below [Eq. (7)]
is met [see Fig. 1].Fig. 1. New kind of surface plasmons propagating between a pair of
quartic media and . (a-b) The constitutive effective parameter
matrices for the media. (c-d) The corresponding k-surfaces with real. (e) The longitudinal electric field distribution for the
proposed surface plasmon wave propagating between and .The constitutive relationships between and are
represented by a 6x6 transformation matrix (i.e. 36
parameters) and the quartic metamaterials correspond to the
most general linear local constitutive relationship [30-35,1]( )̂ ( ), ( ̂ ̂ ̂ ̂ ) (1)where , , , are 3x3 tensors characterizing dielectric
permittivity, magnetic permeability and magnetoelectric coupling
correspondingly. The examples of matrices are color-coded in
Fig. 1(a-b) for quartic media and . Note, that here we do not
discuss the immediate availability with the current technology of
the values of material parameters we obtain in our examples, but
provide a recipe to obtain the values of the parameters needed for
the desired surface plasmon waves to inform and drive the future
design of the corresponding metamaterials.Plane waves in quartic media follow Maxwell’s equationsand , (2)where vectors and follow the constitutive relations (1).
The Eqs. (1)-(2) can be rewritten as [1], (3)with and(̂ ̂ ), ( ).This system has nontrivial solutions if the determinantis zero which is equivalent to a quartic equation with
respect to the components of the k-vector [1]∑ (4)with 35 coefficients . In the sum the powers i, j, l, m run from 0
to 4 such that . For real the quartic Eq.
(4) describes a quartic k-surface, corresponding to solutions ofMaxwell’s Eqs. (2)-(3). The examples of quartic k-surfaces are
shown in Fig. 1(c-d) and correspond to metamaterials represented
by matrices and color-coded in Fig. 1(a-b).In Fig.1(e) we show a field distribution example of the proposed
surface plasmon wave that propagates between quartic mediaand in Fig. 1(a-b). Below we outline the algorithm of finding
pairs of quartic media that support plasmons with customizable
frequencies, wavelengths, propagation direction, penetration
depths and fields.Consider two quartic media, whose interface is in -plane at. Due to translational symmetry along and , solutions ofMaxwell’s equations at this interface can be classified according tothe longitudinal k-vector . For fixed and the
dispersion Eq. (4) is a quartic equation of one variable . In
general, the 4 roots of this equation are complexand represent evanescent waves, decaying or growing in the
z-direction. If are real the complex roots of this equations
come in complex conjugated pairs with opposite attenuation as
follows from the complex conjugate root theorem [36], one root
representing decay along z-axis and another - unbounded growth.
The polarizations of the paired waves are related, which can be
seen from Eq. (3). For example, if matrix is real , then
if the fields of one of the waves are given by , the paired wave
should have for the fields.Now let us assume that we would like to construct a surface
plasmon with custom wavelength propagating in a desired
direction, i.e. with arbitrary . In each bounding
medium we can select 2 pairs of evanescent waves with desired
penetration depths . The other roots of Eq. (4) with ,
should be the diverging waves, corresponding to the selected
evanescent waves. As a result, we can construct a surface wave
from the selected evanescent waves, whose k-vectors are( ) for (5a)( ) , for (5b)We also select custom field components of these waves as( ), where ( ) are
longitudinal fields and ( ) are transverse fields.
The boundary conditions for Maxwell’s equations require the
continuity of the longitudinal components of the fields, which
results in a system of equations:(6)where coefficients are the amplitudes of the evanescent
waves composing the surface plasmon. The dispersion equation of
this novel surface plasmon wave propagating at the boundary of
quartic media corresponds to vanishing of the determinant of the
system (6)|||| (7)For example, at a boundary of two isotropic media with
different dielectric permittivities , and magnetic
permeabilities , , the fields of evanescent waves propagating
in the x-direction can be written as( ) for TM polarization,( ) for TE polarization,turning Eq. (7) into the well-known equation( ) ( )which gives the dispersion of the conventional surface plasmon
polaritons [37]. It is straightforward to obtain the dispersion of
Dyakonov plasmons from Eq. (7) as well (cf. Eq. (1) in Ref [10]).Fig. 2. Examples of the proposed surface plasmons with short and long
wavelengths and penetration depths.After selecting the propagation direction, wavelength,
penetration depths and fields of the proposed surface plasmon,
with the only limitation given by the dispersion Eq. (7), we can find
the effective medium parameters of the quartic metamaterials that
support the desired surface plasmon wave at their boundary. To
do this we apply the solution of the inverse problem of quartic
photonics that we have recently proposed [1]. This routine can be
briefly expressed as follows. If one needs to find a material that
supports 6 plane waves with custom k-vectors and
polarizations , one can construct matrix , whosecolumns are and matrix , whose columnsare found from Eq. (2). Then the
effective parameter matrix of the material is given by [1](8)To find the quartic media that support the desired surface
plasmon waves we select the values of the k-vectors (5) and their
complex conjugates and select the corresponding fields ,and their complex conjugates. This gives and vectors for 4
waves in each media. The other 2 pairs of waves can be selected
freely, as long as they do not have the same as the proposed
surface plasmon wave (this is because Eq. (4) is quartic). This
freedom defines the 36-parametric class of different quartic media
that all support the selected surface plasmon wave as we discuss in
more detail at the end of this letter. After selection of these values
Eq. (8) should be used to find the quartic media and that
support the desired surface plasmon wave [see Fig. 1].The examples of our calculations are shown in Figs. 2-3. In Fig. 2
we demonstrate that boundaries supporting surface plasmon
modes with arbitrary wavelength and penetration depths can be
found using our approach. In Fig. 2(a) the longitudinal electric fieldof a surface plasmon with short wavelength and
small penetration depths into both media is plotted. The
corresponding materials and are color-coded in the inset of
Fig. 2(a) and were found by randomly selecting all of the fields ,
except for one of the components in the determinant (7), which is
adjusted so that (7) is satisfied. Analogously, we found the
boundary that supports a surface plasmon with the same
penetration, but long wavelength as shown in Fig. 2(b).
Figs. 2(c-d) show the modes and the corresponding boundaries in
the insets for the same wavelengths andcorrespondingly, but for a large penetration depth of .Fig. 3. Interference effects of the evanescent waves composing the
proposed surface plasmons. (a) The longitudinal field of a surface
plasmon that shows bi-exponentiality. (b) A surface plasmon with the
phase shift between the evanescent waves in .Conventional surface plasmons are composed of pairs of
evanescent waves, one in each meadium. An important property of
the proposed surface plasmons is, generally speaking, the biexponentiality in each bounding medium. It is demonstrated in Fig.
3. In panel (a) we show in logarithmic scale the longitudinal fieldof a surface plasmon propagating at the boundary color coded
in the inset. As one can see, in each medium the evanescence is biexponential with fast evanescent component overlaying a slowly
decaying component. Such behavior in a transverse cross-section
can be seen, if the evanescent waves composing the proposed
surface plasmon waves are not phase shifted with respect to each
other. An example, when they are phase shifted is demonstrated in
Fig. 3(b). The evanescent waves in medium are not phase
shifted, but there is a phase shift in medium .As was mentioned above, the properties of the proposed surface
plasmon wave are determined by the k-vectors and field vectorsfor the pairs of evanescent waves in each medium. If matrix is
real this automatically defines the parameters of the 2 waves that
are growing away from the boundary into each medium.
Nevertheless, to fully define the matrices one needs to choose kvectors and field vectors for 2 extra waves in each medium, i.e. at
least 36 parameters, which do not affect the properties of the
proposed surface plasmon mode. From this, we can conclude that
each proposed surface plasmon mode corresponds to a broad36-parametric class of material pairs that support this particular
surface plasmon.We reformulate this as follows. We could require existence of
less than 6 waves to define the effective medium parameters
matrix in each medium and complement the truncated Eq. (8)
with restrictions on material parameters. For example, we require
existence of 3 waves in a metamaterial and matrices and in Eq.
(8) would have 3 columns instead of 6.Let us now fix the magnetoelectric couplings and , for both
bounding media, i.e. 36 parameters. Then Eq. (8) is rewritten as(9)This means that the permittivity and permeability matrices andcan be expressed via the matrices and , and the k-vectors and
the field amplitudes of 3 waves in each medium, where( ) and ( ).These 3 waves can be selected to be the 2 evanescent waves
composing the proposed surface plasmon plus 1 growing mode
corresponding to one of these evanescent waves, which defines
the matrices . After this variation of the
magnetoelectric couplings and in Eq. (9) gives the full36-parametric class of the bounding media that support a
particular surface plasmon mode. An important member of this
class is the pair of media with no magnetoelectric coupling, in which case . This means
that for every novel surface plasmon mode proposed in this letter
one can find a pair of simple anisotropic media, which support it.Note, that for the sake of clarity we’ve been limiting ourconsideration by real matrices , and real coefficients, which ensures that that there are growing waves paired
with the evanescent waves composing the surface plasmon modes
and they have complex conjugated fields . These restrictions are
not essential, since and fields in Eq. (8) or and
fields in Eq. (9) can be selected arbitrarily. Thus consideration of
complex-valued matrices expands the 36-parametric classes of
the bounding media to 54-parametric classes if Eq. (9) is used or to72-parametric classes if Eq. (8) is used.In conclusion, we propose an algorithm to find bounding media
that support surface plasmons with arbitrary frequency,
wavelength, propagation direction, penetration depths and fields.
Our approach shows that the any given surface plasmon mode is
supported by a broad range of material pairs, which can be
grouped into a 72-parametric class.