Abstract—Deep neural networks (DNNs) have recently
achieved great success in many visual recognition tasks. However, existing deep neural network models are computationally
expensive and memory intensive, hindering their deployment in
devices with low memory resources or in applications with strict
latency requirements. Therefore, a natural thought is to perform
model compression and acceleration in deep networks without
significantly decreasing the model performance. During the past
five years, tremendous progress has been made in this area. In
this paper, we review the recent techniques for compacting and
accelerating DNN models. In general, these techniques are divided into four categories: parameter pruning and quantization,
low-rank factorization, transferred/compact convolutional filters,
and knowledge distillation. Methods of parameter pruning and
quantization are described first, after that the other techniques
are introduced. For each category, we also provide insightful
analysis about the performance, related applications, advantages
and drawbacks. Then we go through some very recent successful
methods, for example, dynamic capacity networks and stochastic
depths networks. After that, we survey the evaluation matrices,
the main datasets used for evaluating the model performance and
recent benchmark efforts. Finally, we conclude this paper, discuss
remaining the challenges and possible directions for future work.Index Terms—Deep Learning, Convolutional Neural Networks,
Model Compression and Acceleration,I. INTRODUCTIONIn recent years, deep neural networks have recently received
lots of attention, been applied to different applications and
achieved dramatic accuracy improvements in many tasks.
These works rely on deep networks with millions or even
billions of parameters, and the availability of GPUs with
very high computation capability plays a key role in their
success. For example, the work by Krizhevsky et al. [1]
achieved breakthrough results in the 2012 ImageNet Challenge
using a network containing 60 million parameters with five
convolutional layers and three fully-connected layers. Usually,
it takes two to three days to train the whole model on
ImagetNet dataset with a NVIDIA K40 machine. Another
example is the top face verification results on the Labeled
Faces in the Wild (LFW) dataset were obtained with networks
containing hundreds of millions of parameters, using a mix
of convolutional, locally-connected, and fully-connected layers
[2], [3]. It is also very time-consuming to train such a modelYu Cheng is a Senior Researcher at Microsoft, One Microsoft Way,
Redmond, WA 98052, USA.
Duo Wang and Tao Zhang are with the Department of Automation,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
Pan Zhou is with the School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074,
China.to get reasonable performance. In architectures that rely only
on fully-connected layers, the number of parameters can grow
to billions [4].
As larger neural networks with more layers and nodes
are considered, reducing their storage and computational cost
becomes critical, especially for some real-time applications
such as online learning and incremental learning. In addition,
recent years witnessed significant progress in virtual reality,
augmented reality, and smart wearable devices, creating unprecedented opportunities for researchers to tackle fundamental challenges in deploying deep learning systems to portable
devices with limited resources (e.g. memory, CPU, energy,
bandwidth). Efficient deep learning methods can have significant impacts on distributed systems, embedded devices, and
FPGAs for Artificial Intelligence. For example, the ResNet-50
[5] with 50 convolutional layers needs over 95MB memory for
storage and over 3.8 billion floating number multiplications
when processing an image. After discarding some redundant
weights, the network still works as usual but saves more than
75% of parameters and 50% computational time. For devices
like cell phones and FPGAs with only several megabyte
resources, how to compact the models used on them is also
important.
Achieving these goals calls for joint solutions from many
disciplines, including but not limited to machine learning,
optimization, computer architecture, signal processing, and
hardware design. In this paper, we review recent works on
compressing and accelerating deep neural networks, which
attracts a lot of attention from the deep learning community
and already achieved lots of progress in the past years.
Based on their properties, we divide these approaches into
four categories: parameter pruning and quantization, lowrank factorization, transferred/compact convolutional filters,
and knowledge distillation. The parameter pruning and quantization based methods explore the redundancy in the model parameters and try to remove the redundant and uncritical ones.
Low-rank factorization based techniques use matrix/tensor
decomposition to estimate the informative parameters of the
DNNs. The approaches based on transferred/compact convolutional filters design special structural convolutional filters to
reduce the parameter space and save storage/computation. The
knowledge distillation based methods learn a distilled model
and train a more compact neural network to reproduce the
output of a larger network.
In Table I, we briefly summarize these four types of
approaches. The parameter pruning & quantization, low-rank
factorization and knowledge distillation approaches can be
deployed in DNN models with fully connected layers andarXiv:1710.09282v9 [cs.LG] 14 Jun 2020IEEE SIGNAL PROCESSING MAGAZINE, SPECIAL ISSUE ON DEEP LEARNING FOR IMAGE UNDERSTANDING 7Another widely used measurement is the index space saving
defined in several papers [31], [36] asβ(M, M ∗) = a − a∗a∗ , (9)
where β(M, M ∗) is the defined space saving rate.
Similarly, given the running time s of M and s∗ of M ∗,
the speedup rate δ(M, M ∗) is defined as:δ(M, M ∗) = s
s∗ . (10)
Most work used the average training time per epoch to measure
the running time, while in [31], [36], the average testing time
was used. Generally, the compression rate and speedup rate
are highly correlated, as smaller models often results in faster
computation for both the training and the testing stages.
A good compression method is expected to achieve almost
the same performance as the original model with much smaller
parameters and less computational time. However, for different
applications with different CNN designs, the relation between
parameter size and computational time might be different.
For example, it is observed that for deep CNNs with fully
connected layers, most of the parameters are in the fully
connected layers; while for image classification tasks, float
point operations are mainly in the first few convolutional layers
since each filter is convolved with the whole image, which is
usually very large at the beginning. Thus compression and
acceleration of the network should focus on different type of
layers for different applications.
VIII. CHALLENGES AND FUTURE WORKWe summarized recent efforts on compressing and accelerating deep neural networks (DNNs). Here we discuss more
details about how to choose different compression approaches,
technique challenges and possible solutions for future work.A. General SuggestionsThere are no golden criteria to measure which approach
is the best. How to choose a proper method really depends
on the applications and requirements. Here are some general
suggestions we can provide:• If the applications need compacted models from pretrained deep nets, you can choose either pruning &
quantization or low rank factorization based methods.
If you need end-to-end solutions for your problem, the
low rank and transferred convolutional filters approaches
should be considered.• For applications in particular domains (e.g., medical
images), methods with human prior (like the transferred
convolutional filters, structural matrix) sometimes have
benefits. For example, when doing medical images classification, transferred convolutional filters could work
well as medical images (like organ) do have the rotation
transformation property.• The approaches of pruning & quantization generally give
reasonable compression rate while not hurt the accuracy.
Thus for applications which requires stable model performance, it is better to utilize pruning & quantization.• If your application involves small/medium size datasets
or requires significantly improving efficiency, you can try
the knowledge distillation approaches. The compressed
student model can take the benefit of transferring knowledge from teacher model, achieving robust performance
when datasets are not large.• As we mentioned before, these aforementioned techniques are orthogonal. It is reasonable to combine two
or three of them to maximize the gain. For some specific applications, like object detection, which requires
both convolutional and fully connected layers, you can
compress the convolutional layers with a low rank based
method and the fully connected layers with a pruning
technique.B. Technique ChallengesWe also summarize the following challenges still need to
be addressed.• Most of the current state-of-the-art approaches build on
well-designed CNN models, which have limited freedom
to change the configuration (e.g., network architectures,
hyper-parameters). To handle more complicated tasks,
the furture work should provide more plausible ways to
configure the compressed models.• Hardware constraints in various of small platforms (e.g.,
mobile, robotic, self-driving car) are still a major problem
to hinder the extension of deep CNNs. How to make full
use of the limited computational source and how to design
special compression methods for such platforms are still
challenges that need to be addressed.• Pruning is an effective way to compress and accelerate CNNs. The current pruning techniques are mostly
designed to eliminate connections between neurons. On
the other hand, pruning channel can directly reduce the
feature map width and shrink the model into a thinner
one. It is efficient but also challenging because removing
channels might dramatically change the input of the
following layer.• As we mentioned before, methods of structural matrix
and transferred convolutional filters impose prior human
knowledge to the model, which could significantly affect
the performance and stability. It is critical to investigate
how to control the impact of those prior knowledge.• The methods of knowledge distillation provide many benefits such as directly accelerating model without special
hardware or implementations. It is still worthy developing
KD-based approaches and exploring how to improve their
performances.• Despite the great achievements of these compression
approaches, the black box mechanism is still the key
barrier to the adoption. For example, why some neurons/connections are pruned is not clear. Exploring the
knowledge interpret-ability is still an important challenge.C. Possible Future DirectionsTo solve the hyper-parameters configuration problem, we
can rely on the recent neural architecture search strategiesIEEE SIGNAL PROCESSING MAGAZINE, SPECIAL ISSUE ON DEEP LEARNING FOR IMAGE UNDERSTANDING 8[79], [80]. This framework provides a mechanism allowing
the algorithm to automatically learn how to exploit structure
in the problem of interest. Leveraging reinforcement learning
to efficiently sample the design space and improve the model
compression has been tried in [81].
Regarding the use of CNNs in different hardware platforms,
proposing some hardware-aware approaches is one direction.
Wang et al. [82] proposed the Hardware-Aware Automated
Quantization (HAQ) to take the hardware accelerator‘s feedback in the design loop. Similar idea can be applied to make
CNNs more applicable for different platforms. The work in
[83] directly learn the architectures for large-scale target tasks
and target hardware based performance.
Channel pruning provides the efficiency benefit on both
CPU and GPU because no special implementation is required.
But it is also challenging to handle the input configuration.
One possible solution is to use the training-based channel
pruning methods [84], which focus on imposing sparse constraints on weights during training. In addition, training from
scratch for such methods is costly for deep CNNs. In [85], the
authors provided an iterative two-step algorithm to effectively
prune channels in each layer. The work in [86] associated a
scaling factor with each channel and imposed regularization on
these scaling factors during training to automatically identify
unimportant channels. Liu et al. [87] showed that pruned
architecture itself is more crucial and pruning can be useful
as an architecture search paradigm.
Exploring new types of knowledge in the teacher models
and transferring it to the student models is useful for the
knowledge distillation (KD) approaches. Instead of directly reducing and transferring parameters, passing selectivity knowledge of neurons could be helpful. One option is deriving a
way to select essential neurons related to the task [88], [89].
Very recently, the contrastive loss instead of KL divergence
for distillation has been tried in [90].
For methods with the convolutional filters and the structural
matrix, we can conclude that the transformation lies in the
family of functions that only operations on the spatial dimensions. Hence to address the imposed prior issue, one solution is
to provide a generalization of the aforementioned approaches
in two aspects: 1) instead of limiting the transformation to
belong to a set of predefined transformations, let it be the
whole family of spatial transformations applied on 2D filters
or matrix, and 2) learn the transformation jointly with all the
model parameters.
Despite the image classification task, people are also adapting the compacted models in other tasks [73], [91], [92]. There
is also some work about deep natural language models [93],
[94]. We would like to see more work for applications with
larger deep nets (e.g., video and image frames [95], [96],
vision + language [97] and GANs [98], [99]).