This is CS231n. And I'm Professor Fei-Fei Li from computer science
department. I will be co-teaching this quarter with Professor Ehsan Adeli and my graduate student Zane.
So you'll meet them as well as our wonderful TA team that you will meet later.
So I just want to get started. So this is what excites me, that AI
has become such an interdisciplinary field, that what you're going to learn in this class,
of course, is very technical. It's about computer vision and deep learning. But I really do hope that you take
it to whichever discipline you work in and are passionate about and apply it.
So we hear a lot about the field of AI. So how do we position computer vision
and the scope of this class? If you consider AI as this big bubble,
computer vision is very much an integral part of AI.
Some of you have heard me saying that not only vision is part of intelligence, it's a cornerstone to intelligence.
Unlocking the mystery of visual intelligence is unlocking the mystery of intelligence.
But one of the most important tools, mathematical tools,
to solving AI is machine learning or some people call statistical machine learning.
And this is exactly what we will be talking about.
Within the field of machine learning, in the past 10 plus years, we have seen a major revolution
called deep learning. And I'll explain a little bit of what deep learning is. Deep learning is a set of algorithmic techniques
that is built around a family of algorithms called neural networks. And so if you ask me to pinpoint the scope of this class,
we'll not be able to cover the entirety of computer vision. We'll not be able to cover the entirety of machine
learning or deep learning. But we're going to cover the core intersection of these two fields.
And of course, just like the entirety of AI,
computer vision is becoming more and more an interdisciplinary field.
A lot of the techniques we use as well as the problems we work with intersect with many different other fields, like natural language
processing, speech recognition, robotics, and AI as a whole
is a field that intersects with mathematics, neuroscience, computer science, psychology, physics, biology,
and many application areas from medicine to law to education and business and so on.
So what you will get for this lecture, our first lecture,
is I'll give a very brief history of computer vision and deep learning. And then Professor Adeli will go over the overview of this course
and lay the groundwork of how this course is set up and what our expectations are.
So the history of vision did not begin when you were born
or humanity was born. The history of vision began 540 million years ago.
You might ask, what happened 540 million years ago? Why are we pinpointing a relatively specific date or year
in evolution. Well, it's because a lot of fossil studies have shown us that there is a mystery period called Cambrian
explosion. The fossil studies showed about 10 million years in evolution
during that time, which is a very short period of time for evolution. We see the explosion of animal species
in the fossil study, which means before the Cambrian explosion, life on Earth was pretty chill.
It was actually in the water. There's no animals on the land yet.
And animals just float around. So what caused this explosion in animal speciation?
There were many theories, from climate to chemical composition of the ocean water. But one of the most compelling theories was the onset of ice.
The first animal, a trilobite, they gained photosensitive cells.
So the eyes we were talking about were not sophisticated lenses and retinas and nerve cells.
It was literally a very simple pinhole. And that pinhole collected light.
Once you collected light, life is completely different.
Without sensors, life is metabolism. It's very passive.
It is just metabolism. And you come and go. With sensors, you become an integral part of the environment
that you might want to change. You might want to actually survive in it.
Some animals or plants become your dinner. And you become someone else's dinner.
So evolutionary forces drives intelligence
to evolve because of the onset of sensors, because of the onset of vision, along with haptics
or tactile sensing. Those are the oldest sensors for animals.
So that entire course of 540 million years of evolution of vision is the evolution of intelligence.
Vision as one of the primary senses of animals drove the development of nervous system, the development
of intelligence. Almost all animals on Earth today we know of
have vision or use vision as one of the primary senses. Humans are especially visual animals.
More than half of our cortical cells are involved in visual processing.
And we have a very complex and convoluted visual system. So this is what excites me to enter the field of vision.
And I hope it excites you. So now, let's just fast forward from Cambrian explosion
to actually human civilization. Humans do innovate.
And not only we see. We want to build machines that see. So here's a couple of drawings by, of course,
Leonardo da Vinci, who was just forever curious about everything. He studied camera obscura for how to make steam machines.
In fact, even way before him, in ancient Greece
and in ancient China, we have seen documents about thinkers, philosophers thinking
about how to project objects through pinholes
and to create images of objects. And of course, in our modern life,
cameras have truly exploded. But cameras are not enough for seeing, just like eyes are not
enough for seeing. These are apparatus. We need to understand how visual intelligence happens.
And that's really the crux of this course. So let's just talk a little bit of the history that brought us
to this intersection of deep learning and computer vision. So let me go back to the 1950s.
The 1950s-- a set of very critically important experiments
happened in neuroscience. And that was the study of the visual pathways of mammals, especially the seminal work
by Hubel and Wiesel. They used electrodes to put into live cats anesthetized.
And then they studied the receptive field of neurons that are in the primary visual cortex.
What they have learned, to their surprise, are two very important things.
One is that neurons that are responsible for seeing
in the primary visual cortex have their own individual receptive fields.
Receptive fields means that for every neuron, there is a part of space it actually sees.
It's not all the space. It's not very big. It tends to be a very confined patch of the space.
And within that space, it sees specialized patterns,
simple patterns, when you're measuring from the early part
of the visual pathway. And by and large, in the primary visual cortex,
which is around here in the back of the head, not near your eyes, it's oriented edges or moving oriented edges.
So every neuron, some neuron will be seeing an edge like this. Some will be seeing an edge like this or this.
And that's how the computation in the brain begins.
The second thing they learned is that visual pathway is hierarchical. As you move beyond the visual pathway,
the neurons feed into other neurons. And the neurons in the higher layers
or deeper layers of the visual hierarchy have more complex receptive fields.
So if you begin with oriented edges, you might feed into a corner receptor.
You might feed into an object receptor. I'm overly simplifying.
But that's the concept, is that neurons feed into each other. And then they create this big network of computation.
Of course, most of you sitting here are already thinking the way I've been describing this will have a profound impact
on the neural network modeling of visual algorithms.
Let's keep going. That's year 1959. It's very early studies of seeing.
By the way, about 30 years later-- maybe not quite-- 20 something years later,
Hubel and Wiesel won the Nobel Prize in medicine for studying this, uncovering the principles
of visual processing. Another milestone in the early history of computer vision
was the first PhD thesis of computer vision. Most people attribute Larry Roberts in 1963
writing the first PhD thesis just studying shape. And this is a very, very character representation
of the world. And the idea is that, can we take a shape like this and understand that the surfaces and the corners and features
of this shape? It's intuitive that humans do. So an entire PhD thesis is devoted to this.
And that's the beginning of computer vision.
And around that time, in 1966, an MIT professor
created a summer project in MIT and asked to hire a few undergrads, very smart ones, to study vision.
And the goal was pretty much solve computer vision or solve vision for one summer.
Of course, just like the rest of the history of AI, we tend to be overoptimistic of what we can
do in a short period of time. So vision did not get solved in that summer.
In fact, it has blossomed into an incredible computer science
field. If you go to our annual conferences every year now, it has more than 10,000 people attending.
But 1960s is where, between Larry Roberts PhD thesis as well
as this kind of project, we in our field considered that the beginning of the field of computer vision.
A seminal book was written in the 1970s by David Marr, who unfortunately died too early.
He wanted to study vision systematically and start to consider how visual processing happens.
Even though this is not explicitly stated, but there is a lot of inspiration from neuroscience and cognitive science.
He was thinking about, if you take an input image,
how do we visually process and understand the image? Maybe the first layer is more like edges, just like we saw.
He calls it primal sketch. And then there is a 2 and 1/2 D sketch which separates different
depth of the objects in the image.
So the ball is the foreground object. And then the grass here-- oh, no, not grass.
The ground here is the background. So he does these 2 and 1/2 D sketch.
And then, finally, David Marr believes the grand holy grail
victory of solving vision is to know the entire full 3D
representation. And that is actually the hardest thing of vision.
Let me digress for 20 seconds. Because if you think about vision for all animals,
it's an ill posed problem. Since the early trilobites who collected light
from underwater, light-- the world through photons is projected on something
on a surface more or less 2D. At that time, it was just, I don't know, some patch
in the animal. But right now, for us, it's a retina. But the actual world is 3D.
So recovering 3D information, the entire 3D world,
from 2D images is the fundamental problem nature had to solve and computer vision has to solve.
And mathematically, that's an ill-posed problem. So what did we later do?
Anybody have a wild guess?
[INAUDIBLE] Yes. The trick that nature did is develop multiple eyes, mostly
two. Some animals have more than two. And then you triangulate information.
But two eyes are not enough. You actually have to understand correspondences and all that.
We'll touch on some of these topics. But there are other computer vision classes taht Stanford
offers that also specifically talk about 3D vision. But the point is it's a very hard problem.
And we have to solve it. Nature has solved it. Humans have solved it but not to extreme precision.
In fact, humans are not that precise. I roughly know the 3D shapes.
But I don't have geometric precision of all the shapes. So that's one thing to consider and appreciate
how hard this problem is. Another thing that is very different for computer vision
and language is actually something philosophically subtle. Language doesn't exist in nature.
You cannot point to something and say there is language. Language is a purely generated thing.
I don't even know what word to use. It comes through our brain.
It's generated. It's 1D. It's sequential. So this actually has profound implications in the latest
wave of GenAI algorithms. This is why these LLMs, which is outside
of the scope of this class, is so powerful because we can model language that way.
But vision is not generated. There is actually a physical world out there respecting the laws of physics and materials and all
that. So vision has very different tasks. So I just want you to appreciate the difference between language
and vision and actually, frankly, appreciate nature, how it solved this problem.
Let's keep going. 1970s, the early pioneers of computer vision, without data,
without really much of powerful computers, without the mathematical advances we have seen today,
are already beginning to solve some of the harder problems of computer vision-- for example, recognition of objects.
Here in Stanford, one of the pioneering work is called generalized cylinders by Rodney Brooks and Tom
Binford. And ironically, Rodney Brooks today is on campus, actually,
over there giving a talk at the robotics conference. And he went on to become one of the greatest
roboticists of our time and was founder of Roomba and many other robots.
And then not very far from us in another part of Palo Alto, researchers have worked on these also compositional models
of human body and objects. And then in the 1980s, digital photos start to appear.
At least photos start to appear. And people can digitize that a little bit.
And then there are some great work in edge detection. You look at all this and probably feel
a sense of disappointment. I mean, it's kind of trivial to get some sketches and edges.
And it's not really going anywhere. That's how computer vision, works at that time.
And in fact, you're not so wrong. That was around the time before many of you
were born that we entered AI winter. The field entered AI winter because the enthusiasm
and, hence, funding for AI research has really dwindled. A lot of things didn't deliver.
Computer vision didn't deliver. Expert systems didn't deliver. Robotics didn't deliver.
But under the hood of this winter, a lot of research
start to grow from different fields, like computer vision, NLP, robotics.
So let's also look at another strand of research that had a profound implication in computer vision,
is that cognitive and neuroscience continue to blossom. And what is really important, especially
for the field of computer vision, is cognitive and neuroscience is starting to point to as the North Star
problems we should work on. For example, psychologists have told us there's something special about seeing nature,
seeing real world. This is a study by Irv Biederman, who
shows that the detection of bicycles on two images differ depending on if the images are scrambled or not.
Think about it. From a phton point of view, these two bicycles land in the same location on your retina.
But somehow the rest of the image impacts the viewer, seeing the target objects.
So there is something telling us that seeing the entire forest or the entire world
impacts the way we see objects. It also tells us visual processing is very fast.
Here's another direct measure of how fast we detect objects.
This is an early 1970s experiment showing people
a video. And the test for the subject is to detect the human
in one of the frames. I suppose every one of you have seen that human in one of the frames.
But think about how remarkable your eyes are or your brain is because you've never seen this video.
I didn't tell you which frame that the target object would appear. I did not tell you what the target
object will look like, where it is, its gestures, and all that. Yet, you have no problem detecting the humans.
And on top of that, these frames are
played at 10 Hertz, which means you're seeing every frame for only 100 milliseconds.
And this is how remarkable our visual system is. In fact, Simon Thorpe, another cognitive neuroscientist,
have measured the speed. If you hook people up in EEG caps and show them complex natural scenes
and ask human subjects to categorize things from animals without--
versus things without animals-- hundreds of them. And then you measure the brain wave.
It turned out, after 150 milliseconds of seeing a photo,
your brain already has a differential signal that categorizes.
You might not be so impressed. Because compared to today's GPUs and modern chips,
150 milliseconds is really orders of magnitude slower. But you got to admire.
Our wetware, our brain, our neurons don't work as fast as transistors.
150 milliseconds is actually really fast. It's only a few hops in the brain
in terms of neural processing. So yet, again, this is telling us humans are really good at seeing objects and categorizing them.
In fact, not only we're so good at seeing objects and categorizing them, we even develop specialized brain
areas that have expert ability in recognizing faces or places or body parts.
And these are discoveries by MIT neurophysiologist in the 1990s
and early 21st century. So all these studies tell us, well, we should not just
be studying these kind of character shapes or the sketches of images.
We really should go after important fundamental problems
that drives visual intelligence. And one of those problems that everything has been telling us is object recognition--
is object recognition in natural setting. There is a lot of objects out there in the world.
And studying this is going to be part of the unlocking of visual intelligence.
And that's what we did. As a field, we started by looking at how we can separate foreground objects
from background objects. This is called recognition by grouping in the 1990s.
Keep in mind, we're still in AI winter. But research is actually happening and progressing.
And then there is studies of features. And some of you might still remember
sift features and matching. And when I enter grad school, the most exciting thing
was face detection. I remembered that first year in my grad school, this paper was published.
And five years later, the first digital camera used this paper's algorithm and delivered automatic face focus
because of face detection. So things started to work and taken into industry.
And then around the early 21st century, a very important thing started to happen,
is internet started to happen. When internet started to happen, data started to proliferate.
And the combination of digital cameras and internet started to give the field of computer vision
some data to work with. So in that early days, we're working with thousands of images
or tens of thousands of images to study the visual recognition problem or the object recognition problem.
So you've got data sets like Pascal Visual Object Challenge or Caltech 101.
I'm going to pause here. And this is where the first thread of computer vision
start to progress. And you might be wondering, why is she pausing? Because I'm going to come back and talk about deep learning.
So while this field of vision was progressing
through neurophysiology to computer vision, to cognitive neuroscience, to computer vision again,
a separate effort is going on in parallel. And that eventually became deep learning.
It started from these early studies of neural network,
things like perceptron. And people like Rumelhart started to work.
And of course, Jeff Hinton in his early days, started to work with a small number of artificial neurons
and look at how that can process information and learn.
And you've heard people like the great minds like Marvin Minsky
and his colleagues working on different aspects of this perception.
But Marvin Minsky did say that perceptrons cannot learn these
XOR logic functions. And that caused a little bit of a setback in neural network.
Well, things continued to progress despite the setback. And one of the most important work before the first inflection
point is this neocognitron work by Fukushima in Japan. Fukushima hand-designed a neural network that looks like this.
So it has about five or six layers. And then he kind of designed the different functions
across the layers, which you will learn more, that more or less was
inspired by the visual pathway that I was describing. Remember the cat experiment from simple receptive field
to more complicated receptive field. And he was doing that here. The early layers have simple functions.
And then the later lighter layers have more complex functions. And the simple ones can call it convolution.
Or he uses the convolution function. And the more complex one, he was pulling the information from the convolution layers.
So neocognitron was really an engineering feat because every parameter was hand-designed.
There are hundreds of parameters. He has to just meticulously put them together so that this small neural network can
recognize digits or letters. So the real breakthrough came around that time in 1986
is a learning rule. That learning rule is called backpropagation. It's going to be one of our first classes
to show you that Rumelhart, Jeff Hinton-- they took neural network architecture
and introduced an error correcting objective function
so that if you put in some input and know what the correct output is, how do you
take the difference between what the neural network outputs versus the actual correct answer and then
propagate the information back so that you can improve the parameters along the neural network?
And that propagation from the output back to the entire neural network
is called backpropagation. It follows some of these basic calculus chain rules.
And that was a watershed moment for neural network algorithm.
And of course, we're still smack in the middle of AI winter. All these work was happening without public fanfare.
But of course, in the world of research, these are very important milestones. One of the most earliest applications of this neural
network with backpropagation is Yann LeCun's convolutional neural network, made in the 1990s when he was working
in the Bell Labs. And what he did is just created a slightly bigger network,
about seven layers-ish, and made it good enough with great engineering capability to recognize letters.
And it was actually shipped to some part of the US Postal Offices and banks to read digits and letters.
So that was an application of early neural network. And then Jeff Hinton and Yann LeCun
continued to work on neural network. It didn't go very far. Because despite these improvements and tweaks
of these neural network, things more or less just stalled.
They collected a big data set of digits and letters. And digits and letters kind of was quasi soft
in terms of recognition. But if you put the system through the kind of digital photos that the neuroscientists were using
to recognize cats and dogs and microwaves and chairs and flowers, it just didn't work.
And a huge part of this problem is the lack of data.
And lack of data is not just an inconvenience. It's actually a mathematical problem
because these algorithms are high capacity algorithms that
actually needs to be driven by lots of data in order to learn to generalize.
And there is some deep mathematical principles behind these rules of generalization and model
overfitting. And data was underappreciated, was underlooked because most people are just
looking at these architectures. They did not realize that data is part of the first class citizen for machine
learning and deep learning. So this is part of the work that my students and I did
in the early 2000s, that we recognize this importance
of data. We hypothesized that the whole field was actually
missing this-- underappreciating the importance of data. So we went about and collected a huge data
set called ImageNet that has 50 million images after cleaning a billion images.
And these 15 million images were sorted across 22,000 categories
of objects. We actually studied a lot of the cognitive and psychology literature to appreciate that 22,000 images were--
sorry, 22,000 categories were roughly in the order of the number of categories that humans learned to recognize
in the early years of their life. And then we open sourced this data set and created an ImageNet challenge called the Large Scale
Visual Recognition Challenge. We curated a subset of ImageNet of a million images or a million
plus images and 1,000 object classes and then ran an international object recognition challenge for many
years. And the goal is that we ask researchers to participate.
And their goal is to create algorithms. It doesn't matter which kind of algorithms. And they will test you on your algorithm's ability to recognize
photos and see if you can call out these 1,000 object classes
as correctly as possible. And here are the errors. First year we run this competition,
the best performing algorithms error was nearly 30%. And it's really pretty abysmal because humans can perform
under like, say, 3% error. And then 2011, it wasn't that exciting.
But something happened in 2012. That was the most exciting year.
That year, Jeff Hinton and his students participated in this challenge using
convolutional neural network. And they reduced the error almost by half. And it truly showed the power of deep learning algorithms.
And so the participating algorithm in 2012 ImageNet
challenge was called AlexNet. And the funny thing is, if you look at AlexNet,
it's not that different from Fukushima's neocognitron 32 years ago.
But two major things happened between these two.
One is that backpropagation happened. It's a principled, mathematically rigorous learning
rule so that you don't have to ever use hand to tune parameters. And that was a major breakthrough theoretically.
Another breakthrough was data. The recognition of data and the understanding of data driving
these high capacity models, which eventually will have trillion parameters-- but at that time was millions
of parameters-- was critical for setting off the deep learning
for this to work. And really, many people consider the year of 2012
and the AlexNet algorithm that won the ImageNet the challenge the historical moment of the birth
or rebirth of modern AI or the birth of deep learning revolution. And of course, the reason many of you are here
is since then, we are in the era of deep learning explosion. If you look at computer vision, some main annual research
conference, called CVPR-- the number of papers have exploded. And our arXiv paper has exploded.
And many new algorithms since then have been invented to participate in the ImageNet
challenge. In the following years, we're going to study some of these algorithms. But the point is that some of these
algorithms beyond Alex that have had a profound impact in the progress of the field of computer vision
and into the applications of computer vision.
So a lot of things have happened. We're going to cover some of these.
Not only the field of computer vision made a major progress in creating algorithms
to recognize everyday m like cats and dogs and chairs-- we also quickly, right after ImageNet challenge,
the 2012 moment, we've got algorithms that can recognize much more complicated images,
can retrieve images, or can do multiple object detections, can do image segmentation.
These are all different tasks in visual recognition that you'll find yourself getting
familiar with throughout this course because vision is not just calling out cats and dogs.
There is so much in the nuanced ability of visual recognition.
And of course, vision is not just static images. So there are work in video classification, human activity
recognition. I'm showing you this overview. You will learn some of these.
You don't have to understand exactly what's going on here. But I want you to appreciate the variety of vision tasks.
Medical imaging, those of you who come from a medical field,
whether it's radiology or pathology or even other aspects of medicine, is deeply visual.
And this has a profound impact. Scientific discovery-- even the seminal picture
you probably remember of the first photography of black hole uses a lot of computer vision and computational photography
techniques. Of course, applications in sustainability and environment
is $also computer vision contributed a lot of that.
And we also have made a lot of progress in image captioning right after the image-- that 2012 moment.
This is actually work by Andrej Karpathy, where he was my student, his thesis work.
Then we also worked on relationship understanding.
So not only visual intelligence is about seeing what's on the pixel,
you can also see what's beyond pixels, including relationships of objects and also style transfer.
A Lot of this work, you will-- actually, Justin Johnson, who will come to guest lecture this course,
will tell you all about his seminal work in style transfer.
And of course, in generative AI eras, we get these really incredible results like face generation.
And this is the very early days of image generation of Dall-E. I
think this is the early Dall-E. Of course, now, Midjourney and everything has gone beyond these avocado and peach chairs.
But really, we are squarely in the most exciting modern era
of AI explosion.
The three converging forces of computation, algorithms,
and data have taken this field just to a whole different level, where we're now
totally out of AI winter. I would say we're in an AI global warming period.
And I don't see any of this slowing down
for both good and bad reasons. And also, just a word, because we are in the Silicon Valley,
we're in the very building of Huang building and NVIDIA lecture hall-- so we cannot ignore also the progress
of hardware and what that played. So here is just the FLOP per dollar graph for NVIDIA's GPUs.
And before 2020, the progress was steady.
But as soon as deep learning started to drive these GPUs and chips, you
can just see the GFLOPS have just completely taken off.
And by any measure, we are in this accelerated curve
of lots of compute as well as lots of AI. And these are just different graphs
showing you conference attendees, startups, and enterprise applications in AI all across
not just computer vision. But also, NLP and others have just exploded.
So quickly, last but not the least, it's been exciting. There has been a lot of successes.
But there is still a lot to be done in computer vision. So this problem is still not totally solved.
And with great tools comes with great consequences as well.
So computer vision can do a lot of good. But it also can do harm.
For example, human bias-- every single AI algorithm today, the large ones,
are driven by data. And data is an artifact of human activities
on Earth and in history. And a lot of the data carry our bias.
And this gets carried in AI systems. We have seen a lot of face recognition algorithms having
the same kind of bias that humans have. And we do have to really recognize that.
We can also use AI to impact human lives, some for the good.
Think about medical imaging. But some are questionable. What if AI is solely behind deciding your job
or deciding your financial loans? So again, is it totally bad?
Is it totally good? These are very complicated issues. This is also why I always get so excited when students from HMS
or law school or education school or business school attend my class because not all AI
issues are engineering issues. We have a lot of human factors and societal issues to solve.
I'm also particularly excited by AI's medicine and health care use. This is something really dear to my heart.
Professor Adeli and Zane, who are also co-instructors of this course, we three of us
work on AI for aging population as well as patients and to try to use computer vision to deliver care
to people. So this is a good use. And also, even in terms of technology,
human vision is remarkable. I want you to come out of not only today's class
but also this entire course to appreciate, despite how much computer vision can do,
there's just so much more nuance, subtlety, richness,
complexity, and also emotion in human vision. Look at these kids studying whatever
that their curiosity lead them or the humor in this image. There's still a lot more that computer vision cannot do.
So I hope that continue to entice you to study computer vision. At this point, I'm going to give the podium to Professor Adeli
to go over the rest of the class. Thank you. [APPLAUSE]
Awesome. Thank you, Fei-Fei. Great to start of the quarter.
And I hope my microphone is working right now. OK, good. I'm seeing some nodding of heads.
So very excited to be here with you all.
And I'm hoping that you will have a fun
and challenging course with an amazing list of core instructors that we have and great TAs.
So in this class, we are going to cover a wide variety of topics around computer vision and use
of deep learning in this space, categorized into four different topics.
We will start with deep learning basics. And let's start actually with a simple question of,
what is computer vision really? So at its core, it's about enabling machines
to see and understand images. And basically, this is the most fundamental task in this space--
in this space is image classification. You give the model an image, say, of a cat.
And the model should output a label cat. And that's it.
But this deceptively simple task is the foundation
for much of more complex applications, from self-driving to medical diagnosis and so on.
So how do we teach a machine to do this? One of the simplest approaches is to use linear classification,
as you can see in this slide. So imagine each of the images in our data set
is shown with a dot in that space. And each axis shows some sort of feature
which was driven from the image itself. Here, we are showing a 2D space for simplicity.
But the task of a linear classifier is to find the hyperplane or the linear function
that separates these two, say, cats from dogs.
But we all know that these linear models often go just only so far.
They struggle when the data isn't cleanly separable with a straight line. So the question is, what's next?
We'll get into the topics of how to model more complex patterns.
And if we do so, we often face challenges
of overfitting and underfitting, which are the topics we will cover in the early lectures of the class.
And to strike the right balance, we
use techniques like regularization to control model complexity and optimization to find the best
fit parameters. So these are the nuts and bolts of deep learning and creating
these models, training models, that not only fits the data
but also generalizes to unseen and new data as well. And now comes the fun part--
neural networks. We've been talking about them quite a lot. And what neural networks do, unlike the linear classifiers,
they stack multiple layers of operations to model non-linear functions to be
able to either classify, to solve the same problem of image classification, and so on.
These are the models powering everything from Google Photos.
And now, everybody's familiar with ChatGPT, ChatGPT's vision models, and so on.
In this course, we will go deep into the details of how they
work, how they are trained. And we will be looking into debugging and improving them.
After looking at the deep learning basics, we will cover the topics of perceiving and understanding
the visual world, which is a complex process that
involves interpreting a vast array of visual information.
And to do so, we often first define tasks that refer to specific challenges or problems.
We aim to solve-- some of the examples are object detection, scene understanding,
motion detection, and so on. And to solve these tasks, we use different models, which
are computational and theoretical frameworks we develop to mimic or explain
how our visual system accomplishes these tasks. One of the examples of these types of models
is neural networks. So by aligning models with tasks,
we can create systems that can see and interpret the world around us.
Speaking of tasks, let's go back to the topic
of image classification, predicting a single label for an entire image.
But we know that real world computer vision is much richer than this.
And let's walk through some of the tasks that go beyond classification. First, semantic segmentation, where we are not just
labeling the object or the entire image as cat or tree or whatever.
Here, we are looking for labels for every single pixel
in the image. So every pixel is a grass, cat, tree, or sky.
But we don't distinguish between individual objects. And next, we have object detection,
where we now want to not only say what is in the image
but also pinpoint the location. And that's why we create bounding boxes around the objects and associate them with specific labels.
And finally, we have instance segmentation. We'll go into instance segmentation, which is
the most granular of them all. It combines the ideas of detection and segmentation
together. And every object instance gets its own mask. So these tasks require much deeper special understanding
and images. And they push the models to do more than just recognizing categories.
The complexity doesn't stop with static images. Let's look at some temporal dimensions.
So there's the task of video classification, as Fei-Fei talked about, where we want to understand
what's happening in video. Is there someone running, jumping, or dancing?
There is the topic of multimodal video understanding, which is combining vision and sound and other modalities.
For example, in this example, the person is playing a vibraphone to really understand
what's happening here. We have to create a blend of visual features and audio features to be able to understand what's happening.
And finally, there is the topic of visualization and understanding that we will be covering in this class, where
we want to interpret what's being learned by the models
and see an attention frame or attention map of what
the model is attending to to do a correct classification and so on.
And then we have models beyond tasks. We look into models. And the very first topic-- let me introduce to you--
that we'll be covering is Convolutional Neural Networks or CNNs. There are a number of operations.
We will be going over the details in the class, starting from an image, a number of convolutions,
sampling and fully connected operations, and, finally, creating the output.
And beyond convolutional neural networks, we will study recurrent neural networks for sequential data
and even neural architectures, such as transformers and attention-based frameworks.
So next, we will be covering some large-scale distributed
training topics, which is kind of new this quarter.
I'm sure you've all heard about large language models, large vision models, and so on.
And we will be briefly discussing how these models are actually trained.
We know that data and data sets are expanding models. And models are becoming larger and larger.
And in order to train such models, there are some strategies--
for example, data parallelization, model parallelization-- that we will cover in this class.
But beyond that, there will be so many challenges, such as synchronization between these models and workers
and so on, as well as several other aspects that we'll be covering in one of the lectures this quarter.
And we will go also over some of the trends for training
these large models. After completing this topic, what we will do next is looking into generative and interactive visual
intelligence, where we will first start with self-supervised learning.
Self-supervised learning is a branch of machine learning in which models learn to understand and represent data
by getting some training signals from the data itself. We will cover this topic.
It's one of the approaches that has enabled training of large scale models using vast amounts of data that do not
require labels, unlabeled data. And they have played a key role in recent breakthroughs
in computer vision in general. And we will talk a little bit about generative models.
They go beyond recognition. They actually generate.
This is an example of the content of a Stanford campus photo, which is reimagined in the style of Van Gogh's Starry
Night. This is known as style transfer, a classic application
of neural generative techniques. Generative models can now translate language
into images given a prompt. A model like Dall-E, Dall-E 2 generates an entirely novel
image. This showcases how generative vision models
blend understanding, creativity, and control in their generations.
And you've probably heard recently about the topic of diffusion models in general.
That's another thing that we'll be covering in this quarter.
They basically learn to reverse a gradual noising process to generate images.
And interestingly, in assignment 3, you will actually be implementing a generative model
that generates emojis from text inputs,
from prompts-- for example, a face with a cowboy hat, which is denoised from pure noise.
Vision language models are the next topic of interest
we will be covering. They connect text and images in a shared representation space.
And given a caption or image, the model retrieves or generates its corresponding pair,
as you can see. So there are a lot of advances in this area. We'll be covering some of the key examples.
Again, this is a key task for cross-modal retrieval
or understanding and visual question answering and so on. So we'll get to that in the class 2.
Moving beyond 2D, models can now reconstruct and generate 3D
representations from images. And here, you can see some voxel-based reconstructions,
shape completion, and even 3D object detection from single
view images. So 3D vision enables more especially grounded
understanding, which is crucial for robotics and AI VR applications.
And finally, vision empowers embodied agents
that act in the physical world. So these models often must perceive, plan,
and execute whether it's cleaning up a messy room
or generalizing from human demonstrations. So with all of these, we will be covering different topics
around generative and interactive visual intelligence. And finally, we will cover some human-centered applications
and implications, as Fei-Fei very nicely explained.
So there is a computer vision. And generally, AI have been having a lot
of impact in the past years. And it's very important to understand
the human-centered aspects and applications. And some of these impacts are reflected
by these awards that are going to researchers in this space.
It was first recognized by the Turing Award 2018, which
is the most prestigious technical award given to major contributions of lasting importance
for computing. Geoffrey Hinton, Yoshua Bengio, and Yann LeCun
received the award for conceptual and engineering during breakthroughs that have made
deep neural networks a critical component of computing. Beyond that, last year, in 2024, Geoffrey Hinton
was jointly awarded the Nobel Prize in physics alongside John Hopfield for their foundational contributions
to neural networks. And finally, I want to very briefly mention the learning
objectives for this class will be formalizing computer vision
applications into tasks. As you can see some of the details here,
we want to develop and train vision models, models that operate on images and visual data--
images, videos, and so on-- gain an understanding of where the field is
and where it is headed. That's why we have some new topics also covered specifically
in this year. So the four topics that I mentioned earlier,
we will be going over the basics in the very first few weeks. Bear with us because these are important topics.
And you need to understand the details first, how to build the models from scratch.
And then we'll get to more interesting, exciting topics of the day--
computer vision. And finally, we'll have one big lecture on human-centered AI
and computer vision. I want to just leave you with what we
will be covering next session. That's going to be image classification
and linear classifiers, which will get us started
with the world of CS231n. Thank you.

We will be talking today about image classification, basically, continuing our discussion
on the topic of image classification from last lecture. And we'll get a little bit into some topics that gets us
closer to neural networks and, ultimately, convolutional neural networks and so on.
We will start with linear classifiers.
Moving to the next slide, this was the syllabus
that we've talked about last lecture,
in the previous lecture, where we did talk about three major categories of topics,
deep learning basics, perceiving and understanding the visual world, reconstructing and interacting
with the visual world as the three major topics, and some subtopics that we will be covering in the class.
And at the end, we will have some discussions around the human-centered AI aspects.
And today, the goal is to cover the first three
items, data-driven approaches, I will try to tell you what this means, and linear classification as well
as the k-nearest neighbor algorithm. So like last-- the previous lecture,
let's start with our core task of image classification.
Again, it's a core task in computer vision. And we actually come back to this task
quite often throughout the quarter because it's a very good benchmark. And we have some examples to tell you
how the algorithms work. So this is one of the items that we come back to quite often.
We want to define that image classification task today and then introduce two of the data-driven approaches for image
classification, one of them, nearest neighbor, and one of them-- the other one, linear classifier.
There are some other approaches which we have listed in our backup slides.
And you're welcome to look at them after the class. But this is what we will be covering.
So what is image classification? Given an image and a number of predefined labels,
predetermined labels, a set of possible labels such as in this example, you see dog, cat, truck, plane,
and so on, the job of the system is to assign one of those labels
to this image. So to us, this is actually a very, very easy task
because our brains, our cognitive system is wired to get a holistic understanding of this image
and assign a label to it. But when it comes to coding this and looking
at how a computer can make sense of this image, that's completely a different story.
And we want to see how machines can make sense of such data.
So images are often defined by matrices of data,
more broadly, more generally, tensors of data. And often, the numbers are--
each of the pixel values are between 0 and 255, which is an 8-bit data structure.
And since this is an image, a colored image, assuming
that it's with a resolution of 800 by 600, since it's an RGB image, it
has three channels of red, green, and blue, RGB, and therefore, it's a tensor of 800
by 600 by 3, as you can see on this slide.
So as you can probably guess, this
is the semantic gap between our perception of this image and how the machine perceives and sees the image, right?
And in order to be able to even understand
how this could be very challenging, let's look at some challenges, some variations
in this type of imaging data. So let's assume, for example-- as one example, let's assume that we move the camera.
If the camera is moved, for example, panning the camera around, even if the cat sits completely
and perfectly still, all of those pixel values, every single pixel value of 800 by 600 by 3 will be changed.
So all these pixels will have a new value. Again, for us humans, it's the same object.
There is no-- absolutely no difference. But from a computer's perspective, it's completely a new data point.
So this is one of the challenges, but there are quite a few others as well.
For example, illumination is another challenge.
So if you've seen or if you've taken courses in graphics or maybe other vision courses
and/or digital image processing courses for engineering applications, you know that the value of each RGB pixel, the RGB
values, are a function of the surface material, color,
and their light source. And that's why same cat, same object may look differently
in terms of numbers when it comes to being pictured in different illumination conditions.
With that in mind, so whether the cat is in a dark room
or under the sun, still, it's the cat. It's one cat. But this is creating challenges for the machine.
Can you maybe name some other challenges that may change the values of the pixels
and create problems for the machine to recognize objects,
other than illumination and viewpoint changes that I mentioned? So background clutter, background objects, yes,
which is actually our next slide. Yes, background clutter is another challenge.
Anything else? Zooming in and out, yes, so scale basically
of the object in the image. Yes, what else? The resolution of the image that is--
that could be considered as-- that's definitely a challenge. But often with machine-learning models or any model
that you want to recognize action objects and images, since we normalize the size of the image,
resolution may not be that important, unless there is zooming effects of the objects.
Occlusion is one of the major problems. Again, as humans, it's very easy to say this is cat.
These are cats. Even the last one, which is actually a very challenging, the one on the right.
You can only see a tail and a little bit of probably a paw in the right side.
One could say, yes, that could be a tiger, or it could be--
I don't know-- a raccoon with a tiny tale. But because this is-- because of the context, because we
know this is inside a living room on a couch, most probably, it's a cat. It's a cat.
So again, for us humans, it's not that hard. Beyond that, there are many other problems.
Deformation. Cats are very deformable. So they create challenges for algorithms to be detected,
recognized. I mean, not today's algorithms. Generally, for building step-by-step algorithms
that can detect objects. So deformation is one of the other major challenges.
And beyond that, the intraclass variation
is one more important challenge.
We know that cats can come in different sizes, colors, patterns, or even, they can-- they have different breeds.
And all of those are still cats. But for the machines, it's not that
easy to recognize the intraclass variations.
One other interesting challenge is the context,
because if you only look at that part, that image on the right,
or if an algorithm looks at this without considering the context,
it's very easy to classify this as a tiger or some other animal.
But because of the context and because we know that there is the effect of shadows
and so on, this could probably be classified correctly.
But the thing is that the classifiers that we have today can do really great job--
good jobs at classifying the images,
identifying the objects in images, thanks to efforts like ImageNet, and also all of the follow-up
works that created larger scale benchmarks for training
larger scale models. And in this class, what we want to do is to get to a place
that we build models that can recognize activity-- recognize
objects, and also other aspects within the image. For the rest of this class, we are
going to be working towards building, step-by-step, the building blocks that are needed for building
those large algorithms. And before doing so, we have to look at the most basic building
block of classifying an image, and that is building,
implementing a function like this. So if you've taken some of the computer science
or engineering courses that often build frameworks through algorithms, like, for example, sorting as a computer
algorithm, it's often-- it often comes with some if-then-else rules
and some for-loops and so on. So there is a clear flowchart of tasks and steps,
if-then-else steps that creates an algorithm for sorting. But when it comes to images and understanding
the visual world, that is not happening, that is a challenge,
there is no way to hard code the steps for classifying images.
Although there has been some efforts in this space.
There are papers that they've tried to come up with algorithms
and steps to recognize objects. And one of those was based on edge detectors,
finding the edges in the image as a first step,
and then after creating all of these patterns, look at the important patterns, for example, corners,
extract some features that are around the corners, or counts the number of specific types of corners,
and based on, from those, try to map that into the output class.
So while this has been an interesting effort and it had some success on very limited variability type
of images, but this is very hard to-- first, it's very hard to scale these types of algorithms.
Even if it works, it's very hard to scale because you have to create these rules
and everything for every single object that you want to recognize. And second, finding the logic for each of those
requires a lot of effort by itself as well. So because of these challenges, I
think these types of algorithms, which are based on creating logics and procedures for detecting objects
or classifying images have not been quite successful. And machine learning comes with this data-driven approach.
So with this new paradigm of-- and another paradigm of looking at this problem
from a data-driven perspective, we
define a procedure of a three-step process. And the first one is to collect data sets
of images and their labels. So there are many different ways of if you
want to recognize a specific type of object
or specific types of objects, we can look for data sets or single data points over the internet
to create data, many samples from each of the examples.
We used to be doing this 10, 20 years ago, using search engines and image search engines over the internet
to create these types of data sets. Now we have all of the data sets.
And then the second step is using machine learning algorithms to train a classifier.
Basically, build a function train that takes the images in the training
data and their associated labels, and builds a model that can relate,
associate images with the labels. And then the last step would be evaluating
the classifier on new images, but which
means implementing a function called predict that takes the model and some test images,
and for those test images that were not part of the training images, predicts the labels and returns those as the output.
So a very simple procedure. But instead of building a logic, we
are building a data-driven approach for it. As I said, we want to talk about two popular methods
and classifiers. One of them is nearest neighbor classifier. This is the easiest form of classification,
and we specifically want to go over this because we
can learn some of the concepts around building
these classifiers. And it's easier to explain some of the details.
And then we'll move to the topic of linear classification. OK to do that, what we do to build the nearest neighbor
classifier. As I said, we need to build the train and predict functions.
The train function needs to just memorize all of the data and labels.
So the training function basically doesn't do anything other than keeping everything in the memory. And then the prediction function--
the predict function looks for the most similar training image.
Basically, it creates a lookup table of all of the images and all of their labels.
And during the prediction or testing time, what it does
is tries to find the closest one, the most similar image, and outputs the label for that image.
Let's look at an example. So assuming that we have these five as in our training data,
then-- yes, you see my cursor. And then this is the query image,
the input image for prediction. What we want to do is to see which of these training data
and training images is the most similar to this one. And for that, we need the distance function.
So this distance function needs to take the two images, each pair of images, each of these images
compared to the query image, and return a value which
defines the similarity between these two inputs, these two
images. There are many different ways of doing that. One of the most popular ones is L1 distance,
which is defined as the sum over all absolute values
of pixel differences between the two images, Image I1 and I2.
As an example, if this is a testing image, if we want to calculate the distance of this image
with an image in the training data, we do a pixel wise subtraction and the difference
between the pixel values and then sum them up, which defines this new-- this value as the distance
between these two images. So this is the most basic distance function,
but it's actually very useful in many applications. We'll be coming back to this L1 and other variations
of distances in the class quite often. With this very simple definition, we want to see how we can get it.
Get this implemented. As I said, the first step is to just memorize the training data.
So the train function just keeps the data in the memory.
And then what the predict function does, using actually some Python libraries and NumPy and so on,
we can implement this in just four lines. We calculate the distances between each of the testing
samples and the training data, take the minimum
for each of the testing samples, and then output the label for the one with mean index.
So this is going to be the implementation
for the predict function. Yeah, the pixel values, as I explained, the simplest form,
this is a tensor of 800 by 600 by 3 and three channels,
and these are RGB values for each of the pixel locations. So yes, I should actually repeat the questions
for online students too. And the question was the pixel values, what do they represent?
Yeah, so the next question is why it's between 0 and 255. So there are many different standards for storing images.
The most popular one that we use in almost all images
that you see online and here they are RGB. RGB is a 24-bit format, sometimes 32
because there's another channel alpha. We don't want to get into those. But the 24-bit format, it means that for each of the channels,
for each of the three channels of red, green, and blue, which creates all of our color combinations,
we can have 8 bits. So that's the standard that is defined.
There are some other frameworks too, but this is the most popular one.
So with that, let me go back to the code and ask you a question.
So I know some of the students, most of the students
come with engineering backgrounds and a little bit of computer science as well, but we want to see with,
say, n samples n examples that we have in the training data how fast the training and prediction happens.
I'm hoping that you're familiar with the big O notation
that we often represents computational and sometimes
space complexities with. But here, if you look at the algorithms,
I'll go with the training data. In the training function-- and then I want you to help me with the answer for prediction.
For the training step, the training is of O1 because we are not actually doing anything.
We are not even moving any data. We are just keeping the copy of the data in the memory.
So no operations, it means that without operations, with an operations of order 1, we
can complete the training step. What about the prediction step for each
of the single examples of the training-- the testing data?
How many operations should we take? N, yes. If we have n training data, it means
that we have to calculate the distance of every single testing image with all of the images in the training data,
so at least in the order of n operations.
So this is not really good because what we often want to do
is-- because training is not doing anything. But during testing, during prediction time,
we are spending so much time just to do comparisons between the data
and the single data points and the training examples.
This would be similar to the fact that each single time that you ask ChatGPT a question,
it will try to see what the answer is and compare it with all of the possible answers over the internet, which
will take years and then return your response. So it wouldn't work when it wants to scale
for very simple problems. We used to be using these types of approaches. So what we often want is to build classifiers that
are fast during prediction. They do it much faster, but it's OK if they take a lot of time
to do during the training because that could be done offline. So with that in mind, although there
has been a lot of efforts making nearest neighbor more--
much faster using GPUs and so on, which are beyond the scope of this class,
if you're interested, you can take a look at those. But with that, I want to look at some of the visualizations
and how this algorithm in general works. So given this space that we have five
classes of red, blue, green, purple and red-- sorry, yellow, and each dot represents one training, sample
in that class, if we partition the space for every single point
you see that we can create these five partitions-- let's say five or in this case six different partitions--
that each point, if you have a testing sample that
is in that specific region, the color of that region shows what the nearest neighbor for that sample will be.
So this is going to be the nearest neighbor algorithm, one
nearest neighbor algorithm partitions the space in this setting. But do you see a problem here in this example?
So the yellow one is exactly-- is in the middle of all of the greens. And this means that probably that's an outlier.
That's probably a noise. And this is the case for many, many problems that we have to solve.
And with that, the reason that there
is this big yellow region in the middle is just this single point.
And because we are only using one nearest neighbor, this happens. So to make it a little bit more robust,
we can increase the number of nearest neighbors that we take, which turns the nearest neighbor algorithm
into a k-nearest neighbor. And we often select more than one point or sample.
And we often take the majority voting for identifying the label for any given testing
sample, testing image. But the problem that you can see here
is now we have some white regions. Those white regions are areas that we cannot make a decision,
a complete decision because those areas are areas that we have equal number of samples from the neighbors from
the three different classes. And there is no way to identify what the label of that example in the white region is.
And for you, if you create these types of spaces for your problems, this
means that if you look at these spaces, it means that those are good regions to go and collect
more data for. So those are unclear spaces. So it's a good way of finding regions
that are important for data-- more data collection. So we can go larger on the value of the k.
But one of the choices that we have, one of the.
Factors that plays an important role is the value of k. But if you remember, we had another decision
to make which was the distance function. We talked about the L1 distance again sum
of all of the absolute values between pairwise differences
of the pixels. And if I visualize the L1 distance or sometimes
in some context, we call it Manhattan distance, the distance function is kind of visualized in this way.
If I look at this square that I have in this space,
all of the points on that square are-- they have the same distance from the origin
from the center point. So this is a good way of visualizing and seeing
how this L1 distance function works. Another popular framework, another popular distance
function that we use is L2, which instead of the absolute value, calculates the square
of the differences, sums it up. But because of the square, we also do a square root.
And visualizing that, we'll get the circle visualization, where
each of the points on the circle are-- they have the same distance from the center, from the origin.
So this visualization actually helps us understand the differences between these distances too.
And these are the most basic and easiest distance functions that we can use. So there are, again, a lot more.
The reason this visualization is helpful is because sometimes if you rotate the-- so x
and y in these two visualizations are basically the features. If you have two pixel values, two features,
then we have this 2D space. And this x and y are often those features.
So if I rotate these features, meaning, if I use other types of features,
this L1 will have a different framework, different value, while it's not any different for L2.
So that's why this is a big difference between L1 and L2. And sometimes if our features are very specific and meaningful
and we want to preserve their information, often L1 is more important, is better
because it has kind of, as you can see,
a shape that preserves and enforces distances based on the features.
But if those features are more arbitrary, then L2 distance makes more sense.
If I want to calculate the distance-- so the distance of all of the points on this shape
from the origin are exactly the same, if I use the L1 distance,
but for L2 distance, the points on this circle have the same distance from the center
or the origin of this space.
So that's basically the main--
what these two images are showing. Any point on this shape, when using an L1 distance,
have the same distance from the origin. And for the circle, any point on the circle,
if you're using L2 distance, you'll have the same distance from the origin.
Yeah, why It's important to-- it's better to use L1 if we want to preserve the features.
So to answer that question, if I rotate the feature
axis, the distances and this distance function changes completely.
While if I do the same here, nothing changes.
It's the exact same value of the features-- distance.
Sorry. So in this case, L1 is very sensitive on the feature values,
while L2 is not. If you select another feature in the same space that is having a different creates a different shape, then
your L function, the distance function changes as well. So if I draw the lines here, again,
the question for online students is why it changes if you rotate. If I select another feature that goes from this side,
then the lines will look different. So if you rotate this thing, but for that shape it's not-- it's
agnostic. So with these two distance functions that we talked about,
if I visualize the space, you can
see with k equals to 1 with one nearest neighbor with L1 and L2,
these are the space partitionings. One of the interesting things that you can see here
is that with L1 function, most of the boundaries
are parallel to the two axes, the two features,
x1 and x2, very much sensitive to the features. While there, we have a little bit
of more smooth boundary separation.
So there is a tool online on the lab website that you can play around with this, with different distance
functions and different number of k. You can see, you can create a different setup. So you can play around with it.
But why did we talk about nearest neighbor to begin with? First, yes, it's the easiest problem to solve,
easiest solution, easiest data-driven approach, and great
to start with. But one of the main reasons that we want to iterate and discuss
nearest neighbor is the fact that we can look into the topic of hyperparameters.
Hyperparameters are often some of the variables
that you have to make a decision on to be able to run your algorithm. In this case, the value of k, the number of nearest neighbors
is defined as-- is a hyperparameter. Depending on how many number of nearest neighbors you take,
your outputs will be different. And then another choice that you have here is the distance function.
So the choice of hyperparameters are often
very much data set-dependent and sometimes problem-dependent.
And we have to have a way to identify those to optimize for them for each single problem.
And that's what is often referred to as hyperparameter tuning in machine-learning algorithms,
in deep learning algorithms and so on. And how to do that? How to set the hyperparameters?
There are different approaches. One of them is to choose the hyperparameters that work
the best for the training data. So you have a set of images or data.
In your training data, you look for the best set
of hyperparameters that generates the best training or minimum training loss.
While it works for the training data, it's not a good idea at all because, especially
with nearest neighbor, k equal to 1 is always the best value. Because you're memorizing training data, so k equal to 1
will give you, always, the 100% accuracy. So we know that this is not a great idea.
The second one is choosing hyperparameter that works best for held-out testing sets.
While this is a little bit better than the first one, there is also a big problem here.
Can anybody say why this is a problem. Exactly, so it's kind of cheating because you are trying
to find the best hyperparameter that works on the testing data, and you don't know how the model will work on any other data
points, not in the testing set. So yes, that is exactly right.
It's not a good idea because we don't know how the model will generalize. And for sure never do this.
As we talked about, it's kind of cheating. And a better idea is to always separate,
take some part of the training data as validation set. And train your model on the training data
on the train portion of the new portion that we call train. And then try to find or optimize your hyperparameter
on the validation set. And after you've found the best set of hyperparameters,
then use those hyperparameters to replicate the results for the testing set and do the predictions
for the testing set. So this is a much better approach, although it does have some challenges itself because.
Sometimes the validation set that you've selected,
it may not be a good representative of the entire landscape because your validation set
is almost always much smaller. And that's why one of the-- a better approach
is to use cross-validation for setting hyperparameters.
Basically, you split your training data into a number of folds, a number of partitions.
Here, in this case, five. And each of the folds plays as the validation set once.
And iteratively, you run this five times for five-fold cross-validation. You do this five times and average the accuracies.
So you set a value of the hyperparameter. You run this for all these five sets, define the accuracy,
calculate the accuracy on the validation set, average it. And then you do this multiple times
to find the best setting for the hyperparameter. After you found the hyperparameter setting,
you apply it to the testing set. This is a little bit more reliable and generates much better results,
although in larger scale deep learning, it is less practiced because repeating this multiple times
and five times with huge data sets is very hard. So we often use intuitions for setting hyperparameters,
and the single validation set is sometimes the approach we go with.
But this is pretty much advised. Again, outside computer vision, outside larger scale data sets,
often research papers require doing these types of cross-validation and these types
of statistical frameworks to make sure your results are
reproducible on a testing set. Anyways, so there are different approaches. Let's finalize the topic, wrap up
the topic of nearest neighbor, and look
at some examples, some results. So let me introduce you to the CIFAR10 data set.
It's one of the data sets that you're going to be using in your assignments quite often.
It has 10 classes with a number of training images and testing images.
The 10 classes, some of the examples are shown here with nearest neighbor
for each of the testing images. If we run nearest neighbor and select
the top 10 nearest neighbors, they are all visualized there.
As you can imagine and guess, one of the first questions to answer is how many--
what should be the value for k? How many nearest neighbors should we take?
And want to study one of the quick experiments
with five-fold, each of those points is one of the folds in five-fold for each of the values of k,
shows different values here. And as you can probably see here, k equal to 7,
it generates the best results in terms of accuracy, which is close to 29%--
to 28% accuracy, which is actually not too bad
because this is a 10-class classification problem. And with a 10-class classification problem,
often the random guess gets you a 10% accuracy. So this is much better than random guess.
So it's working. It's doing something, but there is a lot of room to improve.
So if we go back and look at the examples, we can actually see there are so many mistakes, especially
with the one that is closest. For example, the fourth row, if you look at that, it's a frog.
But the first example seems to be a cat. Sorry, a dog. And you can guess why this is happening because the distance
is being applied on pixels. And pixel wise, they look like each other.
They have the same type of colors in most pixels, so they are much closer.
This example and many other examples show that distances that work on pixels and pixel values
are not the best choices. We never practice them. There are much better approaches that we'll
be discussing at the end of-- more in the future lectures.
And just to wrap up the topic, this is another example. If you look at this original image, those three images,
while they look very much different in terms of color or maybe occlusion, or the one in the third one
from the left side is just same pixel-- it's the same image with one pixel shifting to the right, I think.
Although from a human eyes perspective, there is no-- absolutely no difference. But the distance between that and the original image
is the same as the other two examples that you see here. I'll stop for a couple of questions,
and this is the summary of what we've discussed. So the question is, how do we make a decision. In those cases, you often go with randomly selected one
of the tops. So if you are to collect more data, if you're--
for example, you're solving a problem now in genetics or you're solving a problem in medical imaging
when you visualize your examples, your features
or whatever. And then in this nearest neighbor space, you do see pockets of space that you don't have any good samples
for, or there is ambiguity, then you often
try to go and find other samples that lie in that same area in that space.
OK, so summarizing what we've talked
about with k-nearest neighbor, it was mostly about understanding the easiest
algorithm, data-driven approach, and then talking a little bit about hyperparameter tuning
and how distance metrics and the value of k play a very important role.
Moving on to the next topic, which is linear classifiers. 25 minutes time to cover this, I want
to spend the remaining time of this lecture to talk about this very important topic.
This is the most important building block for almost.
All of deep learning. And we need to see how this approach is different.
So first we want to see how it's different from nearest neighbor. So this is a parametric approach,
meaning that now we are learning we are finding some parameters, w, or some weights that
map the input image into the output classes, the output numbers.
In this case, when we create this function f that maps input to the output, often
those outputs are kind of membership scores
of the image to each of those 10 output classes labels.
So with this setup that we build, a linear classifier
first maps uses w uses these parameters to map each of the inputs x into a value, which is the output y.
And how this is done is very simple. This image is basically an area of, say, 32 by 32 by 3,
so 3,072 numbers. And this defines our x, which is 3,072 by one vector.
And we know that we have 10 output classes. So we need 10 different scores.
And the scores are-- the output will be kind of a vector of 10 by 1.
And this means that we have to identify to find a weight matrix w that is a 10 by 3,072 that maps x into the output scores.
Just to complete this linear function, we often use this bias term as well.
It's an input-independent value, which actually has
a lot of different use cases. I can talk about it when I do some geometric visualizations,
but it sometimes creates a shift for different class scores
and helps with much better separation of each class.
So as I said, these linear functions are actually building blocks for building neural networks.
Each of these linear classifiers, linear functions when put together, one after the other,
create these large neural networks. Although there are a lot of other things
that need to be added here, but this is one of the most important components.
If we look at some of the popular neural networks,
we can see that linear functions are everywhere in the architectures.
So, to better understand what this mapping and this function is doing, let's go back to our example of CIFAR10
and our training and testing samples and so on, and even make it a little bit simpler.
Instead of looking at large images of 32 by 32, let's look at images of 2 by 2, an input image
that has four pixels. This means that the input image is turned into a vector.
As you can see here, we have to find a w and the values of b.
So the input image is mapped into some scores as the output.
So this is how the linear function
from an algebraic viewpoint looks like. The output scores here, we are considering three classes
of cat, dog, and ship. And as you can see, this function
maps the image, the vector, representing the image into those scores.
So algebraic viewpoint of linear classification. Now let's look at some visual perspectives
of this linear classifier. As you can see, we often create each of these images,
as we talked about for this image.
For each of the classes, we define some sort of-- we have
a row of this-- row in the matrix w. So this row is kind of a template
for that specific class. If I separate it like this, so this image
is multiplied by w and b, and w is-- this is the template from each of the three
classes of cat, dog, and ship. And after training or building the model on the CIFAR data set,
if I look at the visual perspective, a visual point,
viewpoint of the linear classifier, if I look at those templates that are learned for each of the 10 classes,
you can see these templates. So it's very interesting that in some of these cases, for example, for the example for car,
you do see a front of a car template-ish,
and although this is all done with just one linear classifier.
So the visual aspect, visual viewpoint of the linear classifier, and there
is another aspect of geometric viewpoint. What this linear classifier often does is finding those
lines if it's in 2D space, finding those lines that separates each class from the others.
And as you can see here, red, blue, and green are defining different classes, and in higher dimensional space,
instead of those lines, it's these hyperplanes, as you can see in this example on the left.
So you can also see the use of the bias term
here, because if we didn't have the bias, all of these lines should have passed through the origin
from the center of that space, which doesn't really make sense. But with the bias, we can actually
create more reliable functions and decision boundaries.
So a linear function is very useful. A linear classifier is very useful for many applications,
as we talked about. And it's a building block of more complex neural networks.
But it does have its own challenges because it can't classify many instances of separate data.
For example, in this case, if class 1 is the first and third quadrant and the second class
is second and the fourth. There is no way to linearly separate these. Another example is if we have this type of separation
between class 1 and class 2, that shows the distance from the origin being between 1 and 2
as class 1, and then everything else as class 2. Similarly, if there are three modes,
three areas in the space that are one class, and then the second class is everything else.
So in all of these cases, it's actually very hard to do the separation.
So what we should do--
so we talked about linear classifiers and how they can actually map the input images into any form
of labels in the output. But now what remains is how to choose the value w, that
for each of these images maps the image into a score for each single class as the output.
And in order to do that, we need to define a loss function, sometimes referred to as objective function,
that quantifies how bad the classifier, how bad the model is working.
So the level of unhappiness with respect to the score on the training data.
After defining those, we need to find a way to efficiently change
the values of w to be able to minimize that unhappiness,
basically, minimize the loss function. And this is the optimization process.
So the topic of next class, next lecture. And in order to do that, again for simplicity
let's look at an easier and easier example, having these three classes a linear function, as you can see here,
and the three classes of cat, car, and frog.
We need a loss function that tells how good our current classifier is. And in order to do that, we need to parameterize the problem, xi
and yi defining the input image, label images,
and the corresponding labels. And then we need the loss function and distance
function that maps-- looks at the differences and how bad the scores are compared
to the ones that are predicted, the predicted scores fx and w, and the ground truth values, the values that are already given,
yi. We often normalize them based on the number of samples as well,
but it's not that important. So this defines the loss function, the objective function.
So how we can do the optimization,
and how can we really find the w's?
There are different ways of defining this l-- li. And I want to talk about softmax classifier right now.
As an example for that cat, if you
remember the scores that were given were 3.2, 5.1, and a minus 1.7, these
are the scores that are the output of the function we
discussed, f, xi and w. And in order to turn these scores--
because these scores are unbounded and the values are often not very much controllable because this is just a linear function.
In order to turn these into some scoring functions, the best--
the best possible way is to turn these into probabilities, which defines the probability of the class being this class
k for each input image xi. And in order to do that, we first--
this is the function that we use, the softmax function. We first exponentiate the values of the scores
to create these numbers. When we use exp on these numbers,
the numbers will always be-- the outputs will always be positive. And we need to make sure that the probabilities are always
positive. And after creating these numbers, what we can do is just normalize them.
So exponentiate and then normalize based on the sum of all of the samples. So then we normalize them based on sum of all samples.
And this creates a very, very good set of values that define a probability function.
So this is a distribution function. They sum to 1. And if I want to interpret these,
it's very simple to say it's this set of w's, parameters,
thinks that this image is a cat with a probability
of 13% or 0.13. And obviously, this is making a mistake in this example
because the w is not a good setting. We should optimize it and change it.
So these probabilities are the counterparts of these unnormalized log probabilities, which are often
referred to as logits. So if you've taken other machine-learning courses,
or if you-- I'm sure in other fields, you've used logistic regression,
this is a similar type of framework. This is the exact same framework as logistic regression.
And since we have multiple classes here, it's a multinomial logistic regression.
How do we define the function l? I told you that there are different ways of defining the function l.
We want to define a loss function that-- what's objective here? We want to maximize the probability of the sample
belonging to the correct class. So we want to maximize the value of 0.13.
Now we have other larger values in that set.
So if you want to maximize this, this is a maximization problem.
In order to turn it-- because all of the objectives that we define, we try to build a minimization objective
function, the first step is just to negate the values.
We negate it so the maximization problem turns into a minimization problem. And then we also take the log of the value
just to make the numbers a little bit more manageable. So negative log of that value will
define the objective function, the loss function for solving this problem.
Very simple. That's the objective, or the loss function for softmax and for this logistic regression
function. And if you've taken, as I said, other classes like CS-229,
it's often referred to as maximum likelihood estimation as well. It's the same algorithm.
So with that in mind, I want to say that-- so as we discussed,
it's the negative of the log of that probability of the correct class, which defines the objective function
the loss function. And that's basically that simple.
But there are other types of interpreting this framework as well. So one way of redefining this loss function
is saying that we have some estimated probabilities, and we also have a probability function that defines
the correct probabilities. What we want to do is to match these two probability functions.
And in order to do that, we want to minimize the KL divergence,
Kullback-Leibler divergence. This is a information theoretic perspective
of looking at this loss function. And again, those are exactly the same.
This KL divergence in this setting
simplifies into the same negative log function that we defined.
And even going further, this is exactly the cross entropy
function, because if we define this, use this entropy of p,
which is entropy of the correct values, correct probabilities plus that same KL divergence, again,
this simplifies into the same negative log function. And that's because when we use one hot encoding
setting for the classes, the entropy is 0. So that's one of the reasons that we
call this function cross entropy or binary cross entropy function. In all of deep learning, you've probably--
if you've used any of the neural network frameworks, you've heard about BCE, Binary Cross Entropy,
or you will be hearing about it a lot. So this is the same framework.
We start very simple, but we got to the similarities
and differences between each of those. So the objective-- sorry, the loss function
was defined as negative log of this probability, and the probability was defined by the softmax, which
we talked about. And then optimizing for this, which is the topic of next
session, will give us the right w's. But before I end, I want to ask a couple of questions
with this definition that you see here. What is the mean and maximum value
that you can see for the loss function li? Yes, it's 0, which turns into minus minus infinity.
But we have a negative negation there, so it would be infinity. That is correct.
But then we also have to-- yes, that's definitely-- that's right.
And let me actually look at a second question. Yes, this one.
So when we initialize all of the si, so basically, the w's,
in the beginning, it's almost random. So the probabilities of each of the classes
becomes mostly equal.
What is the softmax li, assuming we have c classes?
And especially if it's c10. So because the probabilities are equal,
it means that all of the probabilities are around 1 over C. And then that will be defined as log of C.
And we have 10-- if we have 10 classes, then the log or ln of 10 is 2.3, which is the exp.
We know about it.

Today's lecture topic will be about regularization and optimization, which are two very important concepts more
broadly in deep learning and machine learning, but especially important for computer vision. And we're going to start with a recap from last week
and discuss some of the topics that we discussed last time. So we really honed in on this idea
of image classification as a core task in computer vision. And what this task is is given an image as input,
you try to map this image to a label inside of a set of labels.
So here we have five different labels, cat, dog, bird, deer, and truck. And the goal is to assign the correct label
to the input image. And you're creating some model or some function that takes an image as input and outputs the specific label here.
And we also talked about a lot of the challenges for classification. So one of the main challenges is shown in the top left here,
but it's this idea of the semantic gap between what we as humans perceive in the image, which is the cat,
and what it's actually represented in the computer, which is this grid of pixel values
where you have this multidimensional array or tensor, and you have discrete values for each of the pixels.
This is very different from how we're perceiving the image and just deciding that this is a cat. So being able to map from this complex numeric representation
into one that we humans understand is the core challenge here. But also there's challenges surrounding the images
themselves. So if you look at something like the illumination of the scene, so here you'll have different pixel intensities
based on where the lighting is in the scene. Also you could have certain parts of your object
are in the shade and harder to see. Cats by nature are very deformable, so you talk about deformable objects that can move around
and twist and bend in different ways, so they won't always have the same shape. And this can prove challenging if you're
trying to design an algorithm to detect objects. There's also the challenge of occlusion. So you could have a cat that's hiding underneath the cushions
here, but we as a human can clearly tell it's a cat because of the tail, how it's sticking up at the end here.
And then the way that cats behave, we can infer that this is a cat. You'll also have things like background clutter, where
the object could blend into the background. So we need to account for this somehow as well. And finally, there's this idea of intraclass variation, where
different objects in the same category can look very different from each other, but we still need to group them all into the same category.
So here are a lot of just the challenges of recognition, and why it isn't such a simple problem where you can just
write if else rules to account for everything, and just simple logic to classify.
So if logic is thrown out the window, you can't just create these logic rules, how do you actually create a classifier?
Here's where we talked about data-driven approaches. And we talked about, basically, the simplest machine
learning model, which is this k-nearest neighbors model. And the idea is that you look for a given data point, what
are the existing data points in your training set that are very close in distance to your new data point
coming in. And for the 1-nearest neighbor case, this just results in--
you find the closest data point, you assign it that class label. And you can also look at multiple nearest neighbors where
you're assigning the most common class label among those nearest neighbors. So we talked about these two different approaches.
We talked about how you ideally, don't want to split your data set into train and test,
but you can do train validation and test, so that you can use this validation set here
to actually help you choose your hyperparameters. So the main hyperparameter for k-nearest neighbors
is this k, 1 or 5 in these examples. And what we showed is an example where you're plotting what is your accuracy on this validation set
here over the different k values here. And you would choose the one that has the highest accuracy.
So this is how you use the validation set, and then you would reserve this test set for-- OK, how does your model do on completely new data
it's never seen before? That would be the purpose of the test set. This is all just recap.
There was a bit of confusion about distance metrics. We put a post on Ed that explains this in more detail.
But we talked about two different distance metrics. The most two commonly used ones in machine learning,
which are the Manhattan distance or L1 distance and L2 distance or Euclidean distance.
L2 distance is like if you imagine just the straight line distance--
how we think of distance in everyday usage of the word geometrically. And then Manhattan distance is this idea where you can only
traverse left and right and up and down in this diagram, and you can't move diagonally. So specifically looking at just one quick example here.
The reason why all these points on the line are the same distance from the origin here is because you can't move diagonally,
so you have to move in this case up 0.5 and to the right 0.5, so the total distance is 1, whereas here you're
just going a straight line but it's 1 also. The same distance here. Whereas in the L2 distance, all the points
equidistant from the origin here form a circle because you can just go in the direct line here.
So this is maybe a brief explanation. The final thing we honed in on last time
was this idea of a linear classifier. So the basic idea in the basic setting that we did
is we have an image, which is say, width 32 and height 32, and there are three pixel values for each
of the spatial locations in our image representing the red, green, and blue intensities forming the color.
And the idea is we take this array of numbers for our image, and we flatten it out into an array of just 3,000 different
numbers, 3,072. And then we are multiplying this vector by our weight matrix W.
And the basic idea is if we have a weight matrix W that has a height here of 10 and then the width is 3,071,
we're multiplying each of these rows by our input sample x. And this will give us 10 resulting class scores.
So oftentimes we'll add a bias term as well, which would just be 1 bias term for each class.
So this would be a size 10 vector here. And we also talked about three different ways
you can view or think about these linear models. One is the algebraic viewpoint, which I described here,
where each row is represented-- independently representing the class.
And you multiply it by the input vector x, you get your score
and you add the bias to get your final score. And you do each row independently in the sense. You can also view these learned class weights here
as templates where if we then reravel the vector into the original shape of the image,
we could plot the intensities here and understand what
is the, template per class, which is what this visualization represents.
And then the final way you can think about it is a geometric viewpoint, where
each of these rows in our weight matrix are represented by these lines here in our input space.
And specifically, the line is where we set this equation to 0, which is the decision boundary.
So this forms the point where above the line you could have a positive score, and below the line
you would have a negative score for the class. So these are the different viewpoints
or for how you can view these linear models. They're all doing the same thing. And one nice thing about the geometric viewpoint
is that if you visualize your data, like, say, you want to classify blue versus red here,
it's very easy to tell that you can't draw a line that perfectly separates the data here.
So it's nice way you can gain intuition about what is possible for linear model to do.
OK. I think that's the high-level recap of what we discussed last time.
I'll actually be going into a little bit more detail on the new content for this lecture now,
but I just wanted to pause briefly if anyone had any questions about what we discussed last time or at the beginning of this lecture, feel free to ask.
Yeah. So the question for those online is for this visual viewpoint, is this the same as running k-nearest neighbors?
And this would be maybe one of the neighbors that you're comparing against? Are they mathematically equivalent?
No, they're not the same because these templates are formed from this line, so it's not one specific data
point. But you can still calculate the templates based on this--
they would represent more like, if you see in this diagram here there's the line pointing in the direction of the class,
so it would be representing this point here. Yeah, so the question is, how did we get this 3,072 number?
So the idea here is that if the height of our image is 32 pixels and the width is 32 pixels, and then each location in the image
is represented by three values, the red, green, and blue pixel intensities, we would then get 32 times 32 times 3 total values
to represent the entire image. And that's how we get this 3,072 number.
So here's, I guess, very specific example of a linear model here.
And when we multiply our input x by our weight matrix W,
we get the resulting scores for these different classes. And you can see that for cat it's
not doing so well because car has a higher score. And we want the highest score for the correct class.
Also, here on this second example does pretty well because it's doing it correctly. But then in the frog example, it completely wrong,
where it's by far the lowest score of the three. So intuitively, we can tell that these scores are not very good.
But how do we mathematically formalize this intuition? And how do we determine how good a given model is?
This is the idea of a loss function, which tells you how good or specifically tells you how bad a classifier is.
So given a data set of examples where we're indexing with this
letter i-- we have Xi as each of the training examples, yi as each of the training labels--
we can compute the loss over our entire data set, where we calculate this loss for each training example
by sending it through our model here, which is this f of XiW. We get our label.
And then we compute it compared to the ground truth label yi. And we just take the average over our whole data set.
So this is how we do this. We talked about, in last lecture, the Softmax loss
or the cross-entropy loss, which is the most commonly used loss for classification.
So I won't discuss that again in so much detail here. But basically, it's very high loss
when you predict low probability of the correct class. It's very low loss when you're predicting the correct class
at very high probability. So this what I just explained is all
contained within what we call the data loss. So this is a loss that tells you how
well do the model predictions match our training data. And obviously, we want this to be very low. And if it's very low, it means our model is
fitting our training data well. But there's a second component, which I'll discuss today,
which is this regularization term of the loss function. So what this does is, is it's intended
to prevent the model from doing too well on the training data. So it actually does worse on the training data,
but the goal is to make it do better on new test data or unseen data. So worse on training but better on the test set.
That's the point of regularization. And we'll go over a lot of the intuition for how to think about it in the next slides here.
But the high-level goal is to do worse on the training data, but then better on the test data or just unseen data.
That's the point of regularization. Yeah, so we're computing the loss on each of the i training examples.
Yeah, so the loss of the i-th example uses the Xi and the yi.
That make sense? I mean, you could not have an i here. But this is just saying that i-th lost [INAUDIBLE].
Yeah. Yeah, you normally don't have a different loss for each i if that's what you're asking. Yeah, yeah.
So it's just-- you could just-- we described Li as the loss for the i-th training example, so we're just using it here.
But yeah, it could be i. So for regularization, people usually
have this intuition when thinking about it, where this is a toy example. And the idea is we want to fit some function to these points
where our input is x and our output is y. And you, say, have two different types of models, f1 and f2.
And you're trying to decide which of these is better. So f1 goes through all of our data points,
so the training or the data loss will be very low because it's basically doing it perfectly, whereas f2 doesn't go
through every point perfectly. But intuitively, it feels like, probably, f2
is a better model when we're now testing on new data we've never seen before. So regularization captures this intuition of you
don't want to overfit your data so hard, and you might actually be better off with a model that fits the data less, but is either simpler or has
some other properties that make it a better choice. And so if we ask, OK, how are these models going
to do on new data that's within our same distribution? You'll find that f2 does a much better job at modeling.
So here's it's doing better on the unseen data. So I think, there's also an intuition
in this previous example that's demonstrated very well where we're preferring simpler models where it's like Occam's razor, which is this idea in philosophy
and also scientific discovery where if you have multiple competing hypotheses, you should go with the simplest one first
and then if you know for sure that's wrong, then you can start trying out more complicated ones as you go. But this is maybe also some intuition
you can have for why regularization can be useful.
And then one final thing about this equation that I didn't touch on yet is this lambda parameter here. So this is the regularization strength, which
is another hyperparameter. So we might use training and validation sets to set what is the optimal lambda here as well.
But the basic idea is we can set this to a floating point between, I guess, 0 and infinity, where 0 would be basically,
there is no regularization, up to infinity. You have a really progressively stronger regularization.
So it's very much a tunable knob you have for determining how much you
want to prevent the model from fitting to your training data. And I'll go through some simple examples now of regularization.
So here we have L2 regularization, which basically, what you do is you have your weight matrix,
you square each of the terms in your weight matrix, and then you sum them all together. That gives you your score here that you then multiply by lambda
and you add to your total loss. That's L2 regularization. L1 regularization is very similar,
but instead of squaring, you're taking the absolute value. So in practice, there are some differences between how these two regularizations perform
when you're training models. So one of the things that happens with L2 regularization, because you're squaring each of the values,
when you have a really small value, it gets squared, like, say 0.001. You square it, it becomes even smaller.
So L2 regularization allows for these really small values close to 0, because you then square them,
so they become even smaller. And so your penalty here is very low if you have these very small values with L2.
Whereas L1 you're not squaring it. So it's just whatever the baseline value is. It's not like it's getting smaller
before you're computing this regularization term. So in practice what this leads to is L1 regularization.
You get a lot more values that are 0, actually, in your weight matrix or very close to 0.
Whereas L2 you can have generally it's more spread out where you have values that are small but non-zero
because the penalty becomes so small. It seems pretty clear to you why L2 prefers spread out
weights that are all small. But why does L1 prefer sparse vectors? So I think the way to think of it is that if a value can be 0
and your performance is roughly the same, then this would push you towards zeroing that value.
Whereas for L2 what you might have is the value just becomes very small but non-zero because of the squaring.
So the question is, can we talk about what is pushing towards a 0 value mean? So we're going to talk about more--
how we use this loss term. But the basic idea is we're trying to minimize it.
So we're trying to minimize the loss or minimize the error of our model. And if we have a term here, which
is giving us positive values that it's not affecting the model performance and the data loss,
we will remove those through the optimization procedure. It's a trade-off. You're trying to optimize the joint, some
of the regularization term, the data loss term. So if your data loss isn't changing much, but you're able to go lower on the regularization term,
you'll get a more optimized model. So it will be preferred based on trying to minimize the overall term.
So I think, we'll also touch later in the course about much more complex forms of regularization
where they're all doing this basic idea of worst on the training data to do better on the test data.
But some of them will even change the layers of your model, so they actually get pretty complicated.
This is an ongoing research area of how to regularize models. There's new papers each year, so lots of stuff here.
We'll only cover a small subset in this course. So to summarize, why do we regularize models?
The first is it allows us to express some sort of preference over weights. So if for some reason in our problem,
we think, the solution should be spread out or should contain a lot of sparsity, where a lot of the values in the weight matrix are 0,
we might prefer one set of regularization L2 versus L1 over another.
It also can, depending on how we're regularizing, make the model simpler so that it works better on test data.
So it could simplify the model if we're, say, heavily regularizing really high polynomial terms in our model,
for example in what I showed earlier. Something we won't touch on in too much detail
is especially L2 regularization can actually improve the optimization process, because if you imagine this squared is like a parabola.
So if you're plotting y equals x squared it's a parabola. And these are convex, so you get a lot of nice optimization
properties where there's a global minimum. We won't touch on that in this course. That's beyond the scope. But know that for certain types of optimization,
regularization actually helps train the model faster too.
I guess I have a question for you all. And what we'll do is you'll do a 1 if it's W1 and 2,
with your hand if it's W2. So which of these two weights, W1, W2,
would the L2 regularizer prefer? So we have our input x.
When you multiply it, you do the dot product with the weights, you get the same score, so you get a score of 1 either way.
And here's where the data loss would be the same. And we're trying to determine which of the weights
would our regularizer prefer. So go 1 if you think it's W1 and go 2 if you think it's W2.
All right. Lots of 2s. Yeah, it's W2 because, as you said, it's more spread out. You're going to be squaring each of these turns so it's 1/4 you
square, it becomes 1/16. You sum it all together, it's 1/4 as the total regularization
term here, and then here you square it, so it's 1. So it's four times lower in terms of the regularization
loss. And, as we said, the intuition is as you like, more spread out weights.
And then here's another question, which one would L1 prefer now? So you do 1 if it's weight 1 and 2 if it's weight 2.
We got a lot of 1's. So this one's actually a bit of a trick question. So what L1 regularization is you sum each of the terms,
so they'll both be sum to 1. In practice, you probably would see this one because, as we said, sparsity.
But in terms of a loss standpoint these two weights would actually be equivalent in terms of L1
because 1 is just the sum of these 0.25 four times,
and the other one is just 1. So they're both sum to 1. And so the actual regularization term is the same for these.
Yeah, OK. So what's an example where L1 would be preferred if this is like 0.9, for example?
So just to recap, we have a data set of x,y pairs.
And we have some way to calculate scores for each of the classes, which in our case
is just a linear model. You're doing a matrix multiply. The loss for each of the training examples in the Softmax
loss, which we discussed last time, is you exponentiate each of your scores,
and then you divide by the total sum of the scores. So you exponentiate to make them all positive.
And then you sum to get a probability distribution. So the final values in this all sum to 1.
And you have a score for each class. And you take the minus log of the correct label. So this is the probability of the correct label,
which is given here. And the full loss is you just run this over each of your training examples,
calculate Li for each of those, And? Then you add your regularization term here depending on what is the weights of your model.
Why do we use Softmax in general? So Softmax is great because what it does as a function is it converts any set of floating
point numbers into a probability distribution where they will sum to 1.
And depending on the value of the score, that will translate to the relative probability
of that value. So if you have a really high positive number and everything else is very low negative, you'll have nearly 1
for Softmax and 0's almost for the other values. So it's nice because it converts any list of floating point
numbers into a list of probabilities based on the values of the list.
That's the main utility of Softmax. So the question is that you can view the regularization we
talked about, which is L1, L2, as a way of regularizing based on the magnitude of the weights, which is true.
And how does that translate to simpler models? So I think in L1s explanation is actually pretty simple, because if we prefer, say, terms that have a lot of zeros in it,
it's basically, a linear model with fewer coefficients. So that one is actually, I think, relatively straightforward.
But I think in general, a regularization is not always going to give you a simpler model. It depends on how it's used.
So for example, in the diagram we showed at the very beginning here, here you could imagine that you have L2 regularization
or L1 regularization where you're penalizing more the higher degree polynomial terms of your function.
So in that sense, it's pretty clear how you could design regularization to prefer a simpler model. But it doesn't always need to be that way.
Really, what it is this idea of doing worse on the training data to do better on the test data, and that's not always going to give you a simpler model.
And in fact, there are many types of regularization like dropout that
actually make your model more complex but give you better performance on the test data.
Cool. So now that we've talked about how we can calculate how good a given W is based on the training
data and this regularization term, the question now is, how do we actually find the best W?
And this is what optimization is, which is the second half of today's lecture. So I think when people describe optimization,
they will usually use this idea of a loss landscape, which you can think of as a normal landscape,
like on planet Earth, where the up and down vertical or z-axis direction is the loss.
So this is the value you're trying to minimize. And then, say, in this example, you have two parameters in your model,
which is the x and y direction of where you are in this landscape. And the idea is you're just, basically, a person.
You're walking around this landscape and you're trying to find what is the smallest or lowest point in the landscape.
I think one of the reasons this analogy-- and this is a very commonly used analogy-- a little bit falls apart is because as humans, we can just
see, visually we can look into the distance and see what is the lowest point of the valley. But I think this analogy is actually pretty accurate
if you think of the person as being blindfolded. They don't have access to any visual information. They can only feel the Earth where they are right now
and understand what is the slope of the ground on the current point in which they're standing. I think if you view it in that lens,
this analogy actually becomes extremely accurate for how we're trying to find the best model.
And we have this complex landscape of different loss values depending on the parameters of our model, which
translate to the location of the person in this landscape. So how can you find the best point?
We could go with a really simple idea, which is maybe a really
bad idea, but it could work. So here it's just basically, a for loop where we're trying 1,000 different values of W randomly,
and we're just choosing the best one. So obviously, not very mathematically rigorous, but you will do better than a random baseline.
And if you had nothing else to go for, maybe this isn't so bad. You would get 15.5% accuracy on the CIFAR-10 data set, which
is the one I showed earlier with the frog and the car and things like that, with the 10 different categories.
But it doesn't perform very good. I mean, the state of the on this data set-- it's basically solved through modern deep learning,
and you get 99.7% accuracy. So clearly, it's not bad, but it's also, I wouldn't say,
particularly good. Strategy number 2, which is what I maybe explained a bit earlier,
is this idea of following the slope. So for this, you can imagine you're blindfolded
on the lost landscape, and you're feeling the ground underneath you. And you're thinking, OK, which way
is the slope of the Earth pointing me? And I should walk in that direction at all times.
This basic idea is the fundamental way in which we train all the models in this course and in which basically all deep learning models are
trained, where you're feeling the location of the current place in the loss landscape and you're going down the hill.
So this is a very intuitive way to explain it. We'll now go over more of the math behind it, but this is what you should be visualizing in your head.
So how do you actually follow the slope? So in one dimension, I'm sure you all are familiar with the idea of a derivative, which in calculus we
can think of as this limit h definition where we add a very small number to our current location,
we calculate the value of the function at that new location, we subtract the current location, and then we divide by the step size.
And as we take the limit for h to approaching 0, this gives us the derivative of the function at that point.
Now, this is for 1D, but in multiple dimensions you use the gradient, which is where you're calculating, essentially,
this limit definition for each of the values separately.
So you have a different derivative for each of your values. And you get a vector instead.
And this gives you the direction along each dimension. So you can actually calculate the slope in the dimension
by taking the dot product of the gradient with the direction and specifically the direction of the steepest descent
or down the hill is the negative gradient. So the gradient points up the hill. The negative gradient points down the hill.
So this is the direction we should be traveling if we're trying to get to the bottom of this lost landscape.
So maybe what are some ways you can calculate the derivative. A really simple one is you could just actually try to use the limit h definition with a very small h,
so you add 0.0001. You actually can compute the last two digits
of the loss changed slightly. So you can compute the difference, divide by the step size, and you can get an approximation
of your derivative here. And you could actually do this for each of your values
in your W. You just do this procedure over and over again. But it has a few problems.
It's very slow because you just need to loop through each of the values. It's also approximate, so you're not even calculating
the actual derivative. And especially, with floating point arithmetic you can get pretty significant errors here,
so this is not really preferred. But this basic idea or intuition of what we could be doing
is to calculate the derivative this way. But really we have the loss as a function of W.
So we know how to calculate the scores to get our loss, which is given by our function for our model.
And we can then compute the total loss with the regularization terms as well. And this entire loss is a function of basically W's--
the W's, the Xi's and the yi's. So you have your W matrix, you have your Xi's and yi's, and then you have this formula with maybe
some logs and exponents. But fundamentally, this is a function of W, X, and y.
And we specifically want to calculate the gradient, which is given by this Greek letter nabla of our loss
with respect to the weights. So we can imagine our Xi and yi's are held constant.
And we're trying to calculate the derivative just with respect to the weights.
So to do this, we can just use calculus, use the chain rule, use the different methods we've learned
for calculating derivatives based on complex equations
or not so complex. But you need to have some logs and exponents and chain rules here to solve it.
So this will be an exercise in the homework. So I won't go through step by step how to do it now. But it is relatively straightforward.
I think conceptually it should make sense to you all how you do this. You assume that X and the y's are constant. Then you solve for what is the derivative as you change W.
So now we actually have a way where we can calculate W based on our--
sorry, dW, the gradient of W, with respect to our data and the current W, and whatever our loss function
is, which is how to compute the error. So this is, I guess, a summary.
So you could do a numerical gradient, but it's approximate slow. And the nice thing is that it's very easy to write.
You just add a really small h, take the difference divide by h. The analytic gradient is nice because it's exact.
It's fast, but you could-- potentially, if you're creating a new gradient from scratch, like new code to calculate it from scratch,
you could have an error in it. So if you are doing this, people normally will have a gradient check, which is where they try the h version, where they have a really small h
value, and then they make sure that it's around the same neighborhood. And that's a good way to make sure you don't have any bugs in your code.
There'll be gradient checks in your homework assignments to make sure your implementations are correct also.
Yeah, so the question is we often say we want a loss function that's differentiable
because then we can calculate the gradients, but if we have a better loss function somehow and we can't analytically calculate the gradient,
but we could use this h numerical method, could we do that?
I think, in general, it's hard to construct a better loss function that would be non-differentiable.
You could possibly, though. There is just a true loss function that is the best for your case but it is not differentiable.
You could go with this approach, and it may work. I think, it would struggle if, for example,
your loss is just truly non-differentiable across all points, and it's basically like a cluster
of non-connected points, then moving in the steepest descent
wouldn't really get you necessarily at your best solution if they're not well connected and forming this geography.
So it could work. But I would think that if your loss is not differentiable across most of the domain then
probably you wouldn't be able to use these approaches to find the bottom point.
Yeah, so I guess TLDR of the explanation is that if your function is convex, then it works very well with this gradient descent
or steepest descent type of approach. But if you have a non-differentiable, non-convex function, probably this approach won't
work as well because you're not going to be stepping in the right direction. It's not necessarily error prone if your code is perfectly good,
but maybe you have a mistake in your code and it's hard to tell right away. But the h, the limit h definition
is very easy to code up. You just set h to be a very small value, you run it through your function, and you add a very small amount.
So that's less error-prone for implementation. [INAUDIBLE] For implementation.
OK. Not more error prone if it's worth it. Correct. OK. So now I'll talk about this fundamental algorithm
for optimization called gradient descent. And the basic intuition is what we already explained before. We calculate the slope at each point when
we're on our loss landscape, and we take a step in the direction downwards towards the bottom of the loss landscape.
So what we do is we calculate the gradients of our weights given the loss function, the data,
and our current weight values. This tells us how much we should change each of the weights to go down the slope, and then we have to have a step size.
So how far down the hill are we taking a step in the direction? And so you go down the hill, so it's
the minus sign here in the step size times the gradient. So this is basically what gradient descent is.
You're calculating the gradient at each step. And you're moving a fixed direction in the direction of the negative gradient, down the hill.
So given a concrete example here. So instead of this being a 3D loss landscape, often people will visualize it like this where we're looking
down at the landscape. And purple would represent the highest points and red would represent the bottom or the valley here.
And we could imagine we have our original W. We can calculate the loss. We know the direction of the slope, the negative gradient
direction. And this arrow might represent the fixed step size that we talked about before.
We're taking a fixed step size in that direction.
Yes, you can see it's fixed step size. But as the gradient becomes smaller,
we're still multiplying it by this fixed step size. So the effective step size actually does become smaller because the gradient is smaller
near the end where it's flat, or near the end where it's more flat. So this is what it looks like when
we're always heading in the direction of the steepest descent. So the question is, when we step down,
how we know when we're going to stop? Well, I guess in this formula you just keep looping forever
so you never stop. So this was probably not the best. Normally, you have a predetermined number of iterations that you run it for.
Or you can look at if the loss is not significantly changing by a fixed amount also.
You can have a tolerance for how much you're expecting the loss to keep decreasing by. And if it's no longer decreasing--
it's only decreasing by 1E minus 5 or 1E minus 9, maybe you stop there because it's good enough.
So those are the two ways you can determine when to stop is fixed number of iterations or stopping criteria of how much--
we're not really improving that much anymore.
So now I'll talk about the most popular variant of gradient descent, which is called stochastic gradient
descent. And when we talked about gradient descent before, we talked about calculating
the loss of our weights by summing over our entire training set, the loss of Li for each i in our entire n training sets.
But this is potentially a lot of computation if we have a very large data set.
So what stochastic gradient descent is, is basically, now instead of looking at the entire data set,
we're looking at a subset each time, which we call a mini batch or a batch of data. And so here if we look at the code
it's like we're sampling 256 data points from our data set, so the batch size is 256.
We evaluate the gradients of this 256 subset of our data set,
and then we do the same thing as before. So the reason why it's called stochastic gradient descent is because we're sampling a random subset of our data
set each time we're running the algorithm-- each step of the algorithm. So this is stochastic gradient descent.
You're basically running it on a random subset each time. And in practice people won't just
sample it completely random. They'll make sure to get through all the examples in their data
set and then loop around again. And that's called one epoch of training, where you loop through all your data samples once
in a random order. There are some problems with gradient descent
or stochastic gradient descent. So this visualization is the same type as the colored one I showed before where we're looking down
the loss landscape. But these curves are called the level set, where it's a set of points where the loss is
the same on all of them. So this is another way of visualizing-- very popular way to visualize top-down looking at the loss,
but it's without the colors. And so you could imagine that you have this phenomenon where
it's a really narrow valley, where it's really steep along the sides, and you're trying to traverse the center of the valley.
And gradient descent actually does run into issues here. Does anyone have any ideas for what could go wrong?
Yeah, so one of the things you could do is overshoot where you're moving up and down along this direction.
And if it's steep enough and your step size is large enough, you might actually oscillate out of the valley.
So you can imagine if your step size is very large and this is really steep, you're actually going to be gaining like you're moving
out and out each time because you always have this fixed step size. So if it's steep enough, you could just
bounce out of the valley. That actually does happen if your learning rate is too large. So that's one thing that can happen.
And then also, even if you're learning rate is not too large, your step size is not too large, you
can have this phenomenon where you're sort of jittering because the gradient is much larger in the steep direction.
So you're jittering, but you're not making very much meaningful progress towards the actual center, because you're spending all this time oscillating back and forth, up
and down. So this is a pretty big issue with just default SGD.
And then mathematically, just an aside, the loss function we consider here to have a high condition number, which
is the ratio of the largest to smallest singular value of the Hessian matrix, which is the second derivative.
So you can imagine the second derivative along this up and down direction is very high. But then side-to-side it's very low because it's very flat,
so that's what causes this phenomenon. All right.
So one of the things we also might have an issue with SGD is what happens if the loss function has a local minima or--
a local minimum or a saddle point? So for example here, for just the very end of this curve
it's completely flat. So if we were to imagine we're moving down the hill here,
we would just get stuck here because it's flat. And we wouldn't be able to progress any further, because when we take the gradient here is 0.
So this is actually a pretty big issue where it'll get stuck either in a local minimum
because once we reach here, we don't really have any direction to go. The gradient is 0.
Or it's very small, and we'll just oscillate back and forth here. And then here it could actually get stuck on this bottom example
because the gradient is 0 here, even though if it went a little bit further it could go down significantly more.
Yeah, so the question is maybe we can change the way we're doing the steps. Maybe we could use the Hessian to determine
the direction we go. We actually do have a brief slide talking about the Hessian style approach at the very end.
That's not very commonly used in deep learning. But the short answer is yes. There are going to be actually several ways in which you
can account for this that we're going to go into in like five minutes. So it's a good question. Yeah. We'll get to that.
So I think one of the other things that you might not know is that empirically, saddle points are actually
much more common as you move to higher dimensional models, so as your weight matrix gets larger and larger,
you're more likely to find these saddle points. And there's this paper describing the frequency of them. If you don't know a saddle point--
it's called a saddle point because it's shaped like a saddle on a horse. And at the center of this saddle,
the gradient is actually 0 in all directions, so it's like the bottom of this and at the top
of this carvature. And so in both the x and the y directions the gradient is 0,
so you could get stuck here despite being very close to going significantly down the loss landscape on either side.
So this is also a pretty common issue with SGD where these saddle points and as we move to higher dimensional spaces,
or this is equivalent to models with more parameters, this is more and more common. This is a big issue.
And then a final issue with SGD is that we are sampling a subset of our data each time.
So we're not looking at the whole-- this represents the entire loss across all the data. But we're looking at just a subset each time.
So we'll actually have somewhat noisy update steps because we're not looking at the entire data set.
So we'll be stepping towards the center-- towards this local minimum that we're trying to reach here.
But each step doesn't go directly in that direction. So there's some noise in how we're progressing because we're
subsampling the data set. OK, cool.
I think to summarize, these are the main issues. And there's a pretty neat trick you can do where you just
basically add momentum. And you can really think of this as the same way as if you have a ball that's rolling down the hill
where it gains momentum. It's actually very similar to how it's modeled in terms of the physical properties. So it's a good way to gain intuition about it
at the very least. So you can imagine that it could help whether you have these local minimum, because if you're
rolling down with enough velocity, you'll be able to come out of it. If you have the saddle points or the just flat point here,
the model, it's been rolling down the entire hill, so it won't get stuck here anymore. It will continue.
Also if you have this poor conditioning value, you will still have maybe some oscillation.
But the nice thing is that it will accumulate speed in this direction to the because it
will have multiple steps that keep going that way. So it will gain faster and faster towards the center here. So it also helps with this problem.
Finally, it can also help average out some of the noise with the gradients because they all have a direction in common, which
is towards this minimum here. And so as you're computing the momentum, it builds on itself,
and it will converge faster because the noise is accounted
for by looking at the direction they all share in common, which is included in the momentum.
So let me show you how to actually do it, but this is the general intuition for how momentum works.
So we have SGD here. We have our mini batch x.
We're computing the gradient, which is dx. We have the learning rate or the step size, which we multiply,
and then we do the negative because we need to go down the hill. This gives us our new x, so this is SGD.
With momentum, we're now updating by this velocity term. So instead of updating by the gradient at the specific point,
we're updating by the velocity. And the velocity at a given time step is given by the previous velocity plus the current slope.
So this is how you calculate it. And you have this rho value, which is the momentum, the actual how much momentum you want to have.
And if you have it very high, then your new velocity is more dependent on the previous time step's velocity.
And this is a running average of the last gradients
in the momentum term here gives you how much to weight the past versus the present. So now we're updating by this.
And we still have this alpha, which is the step size. So it's actually a very simple change. You just are now computing the velocity,
which is a function of the current velocity plus our gradient. So I think I'll pause for questions here.
This is the explanation of momentum. And maybe I could also recap briefly how it resolves all these issues we saw.
So if now that you're adding momentum in over the past gradient steps, you
could see how it would keep continuing along this direction. And depending on your rho, if your momentum is very high, it would keep going and be able to account for a very large
of hump here with the local minimum. Also it's very good at these saddle points because it will just continue along the direction in which it
was going previously for a significant amount of time and poor conditioning. If we're having cumulatively going to the right
upon each step, the momentum will also be consistent there and build up. And then if we're oscillating significantly here,
it'll move less in the direction because the values will cancel out. In terms of the current direction and the velocity,
they'll be pointing the opposite direction, so it'll get minimized. So the question is, what happens if you're
rolling right along the saddle? I mean, I think, in practice it's very unlikely. But in that case, yeah, you would just
get stuck in the saddle, yeah. I think that's your initial conditions, wherever
you start is very unfortunate. So yeah, sometimes I guess that could happen, but it's very unlikely.
Yeah, and it's also why in practice people won't run a single model training run.
Often they'll run multiple ones with different random seeds, just in case something like that could happen.
Another thing is if you're doing stochastic gradient descent, you're much more likely to have, at least, a little bit of noise
to get you out of directly in that saddle back and forth, so I think it's basically, it never would happen because of the randomness.
But hypothetically, I think that could occur. Yeah. So the question is why is the saddle just an issue with SGD
and not optimization in general? It would also be an issue with the entire data set. It might even be more common with the entire data set.
So it's an issue that SGD faces, but it's also an issue that other optimization algorithms that just rely
on gradient descent with no bells and whistles attached would also-- they would face the same thing.
Yeah. Yeah. So the question is, does adding the momentum make it more difficult to converge because we'll overshoot
and then you'll have to come back? I think the short answer is yeah. It might not help with converging, but it will help
you find-- on average will help you find a better minimum point to converge to.
So it will converge maybe more slowly because you won't get stuck in a local minimum.
You would just converge here if there was no momentum versus overshooting. So I think a lot of this stuff is empirically shown where
it's-- it happens to be with the specific class of neural networks. The momentum does help training.
But this is the intuition for why we prefer it. I think, to be honest, people will use whatever works best.
And there are cases where people have found that stochastic gradient descent without momentum would outperform for a particular model.
So here's the intuition about why it could perform better. But in practice, people will just try a bunch of different ones and see what works best.
And I'm going over the most common ones that people try now. Yeah. But yeah, you're right. It could hurt convergence, potentially.
All right. I'll continue then. So yeah, I think we went through this.
And one other thing I wanted to point out is that there are different ways you can formulate this. So these equations are identical,
but you'll sometimes, depending on the implementation, see it written in different ways. But they're doing the same thing.
Maybe in interest of time I'll skip over why they're identical. But you could go over in the slide and prove to yourself that these are essentially
the same formulations. OK. I think, the next thing I'll talk about
is a different optimizer. So we talked about momentum. And now we'll talk about something called RMSProp.
So RMSProp is a bit of an older method now 2012,
but it came out by Geoffrey Hinton's group. And the basic idea is to, instead
of just having this running velocity, which the momentum captures, it's to actually add
element-wise scaling of the gradient. So how do we do this is we have this gradient squared term.
And the decay rate here is very much like the momentum term we explained before, but now it's on the squared gradient.
So we have this running average where we take the previous term here the gradient squared. And then we do 1 minus times.
And then here it is the-- literally, the gradient squared. And so this is a running average of our squared gradients.
So bigger values will get much bigger, smaller values will get much smaller. And if there are consistently large gradients
in certain values those will get very large as we continue our running average here.
And we're actually going to divide here. In the update step we divide by the square root of it. So the basic idea here is we're actually now stepping--
someone asked earlier I think there was a question-- what if we changed the direction in which we're stepping? This is exactly the type of thing you can do.
And this is what this is doing where we're dividing by the squared gradient term. So for values in which we have very large squared gradients,
for the values of W in which the derivative is very large, we'll divide by a larger value.
So we'll step not as far in that direction. And the more flat regions we'll step farther because we're dividing by a smaller term here.
So this is the basic intuition behind it. And it very much addresses one of the questions someone had earlier about can we change the way we're
stepping in the direction? And that's exactly what this is doing here. So you still have a learning rate, but you're dividing it by this square root
of the cumulative squared gradients, which gives you larger steps in the flatter areas of your loss
landscape and shorter steps in the very steep areas. Can anyone explain, I just gave a brief summary,
but what happens in this specific line here of the code?
What happens with our gradient step direction? How does it change? We're dividing by this value, which
is dependent on the current gradient and also the past gradients. When these values are very large,
so these are vector operations. So we have a set of derivatives here.
And we're dividing element-wise by another set of squared gradient values.
So when it's very large, the denominator is very large, then the step becomes effectively less
in that direction because we're dividing by a large value. And when it's a very small value the step becomes much larger, because the gradient squared term is small.
So it's in the denominator and we're increasing the effective step size.
Oh, yeah. So it's specifically for this type of example here where you have maybe a very narrow valley where
you want to be moving more in the flatter direction. Yes, the question is, what is a small gradient
mean in this context? And how does this help us move up along the steep directions less and along the flat directions
more? Yeah, yeah. So I think actually, this is maybe a great visual because it compares the three different approaches here.
So we have with momentum, which you can see it overshoots as there is a question about earlier. But then it comes back.
You have SGD, which is slower because it's just always moving in the fixed direction. And then you have RMSProp, which we just mentioned.
So the way that RMSProp works is because the gradient in the direction that I'm moving my mouse here
is higher, the gradient squared term is larger,
so we move less in that-- sorry, we move less in that direction. So you can see it actually quickly starts turning here
towards the center where it's a flatter landscape at this point, but it's traversing more in that direction. So we're actually changing the direction we're going based on--
going less in the steep direction and more in the flat direction. So These are the three. And then there's one more we'll discuss,
which is by far the most popular optimizer used in modern deep learning.
So it's just a combination of the SGD momentum and RMSProp. So here is almost what the Adam optimizer
is, which is the most popular optimizer in deep learning. And you also have all the prerequisite knowledge now to understand it.
So you look at it. And this first term here in the red is basically the momentum we described before,
where we have the current, so the beta 1 is the momentum term,
and then we have the velocity here. And we're taking a running average. The second moment here is the gradient squared term
for RMSProp. And we're doing the same thing here where we're multiplying the learning rate instead of by the step size
by the velocity. But now we're still doing the thing where we take the square root.
And it's the second moment here. And the reason they use first moment second moment is like a relation to physics and mechanics,
but it's basically just a combination of the two things we explained earlier, where you're accelerating movement
along the flat directions, dampening it along the steep ones, and you're also adding this notion of momentum and velocity.
So you gradually build up speed if you're continuously moving in the same direction. So as it's written right now, this
will actually run into issues at the very first time step. And it might be a little bit unclear to you why,
but I'll actually wait for someone to have a guess. So one thing to note is that these betas, beta1 beta2,
are usually initialized very close to 1, so 0.9, 0.999, and that these two values are also initialized to 0.
So during your first time step, if you just use this formulation of Adam you would run into potentially unwanted behavior.
So one of the other things is it has to do with the second moment calculation.
So this is the main issue here. When you calculate the second moment and then use it on the next line, you run into an issue.
Yeah, so the denominator is 0, basically. Yeah, that's the exact issue. So it starts at 0, so this term is 0.
You have a very large beta. So this value is very small. And if your gradient is not very large in your first step
you can have this whole term basically be very close to 0. Now, we're dividing by something very close to 0,
and it just creates a very large initial step, even though our gradient was small. So that's probably not something we really want.
And so the final thing that Adam has is it adds these bias terms here, which is specifically
to account for this issue where it's dependent now on the time step of training. So I think, this is also something
you'll go into in the homework. I just want to give the basic intuition behind Adam why the naive implementation wouldn't work,
which is this really large initial step. And you'll go over in the homework implementing this. And you'll see how the time step is used.
But the basic idea this is to account for that very large initial step. And as your time step increases, these bias terms
are not needed as much. OK, cool. These are some good defaults that people normally use.
If you're training a model with Adam, you go with these, and maybe it'll work, maybe it won't.
But it's a good starting point. And you can then tell from the remaining slides,
we'll talk about how do you know if your learning rates right. How do you know if these other values are right. So I'll speed up a little bit just in the interest of time.
But the basic idea is that you can see all these different optimizers converging. They all have different properties.
You can see how Adam is this combination of RMSProp and SGD with momentum, where it has characteristics of both, which
is very neat to see visually. It aligns with our intuition.
One final topic related to Adam is that we could look at how regularization
interacts with optimizer. So for example, if we have L2 regularization, how does this affect how the optimizer works?
And I think the answer is it's actually not immediately obvious. And you can do it in different ways. So in default Adam, they compute L2 when they're
computing their gradient. So we looked at the gradient and there was the loss portion of our-- so the data loss portion and then
the regularization loss. For Adam, it's using both of those when it computes the gradient. But AdamW basically, only looks at the data loss
for doing all of these moment calculations and all these steps, and it just adds the regularization term
at the end here. So basically, all I'm trying to describe to you all is there is flexibility for how you incorporate regularization into your optimizers.
Weight decay is generally when you just add it at the end, L2 regularization at the end, and you don't include it in the actual optimizer
for how you're calculating the velocities and momentums, et cetera. So this is the main difference. And sometimes under a lot of settings,
AdamW works slightly better. I think the Llama series from Meta they all use AdamW,
I assume because it does slightly better for them. So we have one function optimizer. Why are you splitting it into two?
Yeah, so if you mix it into one function, that's what Adam does. And AdamW is specifically, separating it into two.
So why you might want to do that is because if you don't want your velocities, your momentums to actually
be a function of the weights, you want it to be a function of the loss. So if you're trying to traverse your loss landscape more
independent of your actual weight values, that's why you might want to separate it. But you still might want a regularization term.
But you don't want it to interfere with the moment calculation. So this is the specific reason why they do it. Ultimately, it's empirical you try both
and you see which one works better. But this is why you would do it that way. OK, cool. So we'll talk about learning rates.
So there are different ways in which learning rates can be chosen.
And sometimes you'll get a very high learning rate where what will happen is basically your loss will get very large as you oscillate out
of the loss landscape, as we described earlier. If you have a very low learning rate, your issue is you just converge very slowly.
If you have a high learning rate but you're not oscillating out, but you might not be able to converge because you're
bumping around the local minimum, but you're not actually able to get any lower in because your learning rate is too high.
And ideally, a good learning rate would have this property where it causes your loss to decrease quickly over time, but then you
see continued improvements as you continue to train the model. In reality, actually, depending on the situation, a lot of these
could be good learning rates, and also depending on the step in training, which is the final thing we'll discuss in lecture today.
So you can actually change your learning rate as you train your model. You don't need to always have a fixed learning rate or step
size. And pretty much all modern deep learning, like all the best models coming out,
have different ways they vary the learning rate during training. So one really simple way you could do it is after a fixed
number of iterations, you just take 1/10 of the learning rate and you continue training.
So this can resolve the issue of where your learning rate is too high for you to be able to converge any further,
so then you reduce it, and you're able to get lower into the loss landscape. And this is really commonly used when training ResNets.
So that's a very popular type of convolutional neural network, which we'll discuss later in the course.
Another thing you could do is cosine learning rate decay. So this one is also extremely popular.
So here you have-- basically, this is like half of a cosine wave
where you're starting at your maximum learning rate here. And then you go down to 0 to the end.
And it follows this 1.2 cosine shape, and here's the formula for calculating it.
I won't go into too many details, but the basic idea is there's a ton of different ways to do it. When your loss uses a cosine learning rate scheduler,
you'll often see a shape like this where you get pretty good continued gains in the middle part of training.
But the basic idea is that the actual shape of your loss during training will highly depend on what scheduler you use.
So this is the basic idea I'm trying to convey. It looks very different, for example, than this one, where you can literally see where we're taking 1/10
of the learning rate during training. Another thing you do is just a linear learning rate decay.
So it just follows a straight line. You could do an inverse square root, et cetera, et cetera. There's basically, an unlimited number of ways
you could mess with your learning rate during training. And depending on the type of model you're training and depending on what works best,
you just choose the one that works best. But here are some ones you could try that could perform well in your setting.
Also a really, really popular strategy is to have a linear warm up. So instead of just starting at your maximum learning rate,
you spend a fixed number of iterations to linearly warm up to whatever your maximum value is, and then
you go about doing whatever scheduler you had afterwards. So for example linear warm up, and then this would be like the inverse square root.
Or linear warm up and then-- cosine is a very popular setup for training models.
One final thing is that there is this empirical rule of thumb
called the linear scaling hypothesis or linear scaling
law, or something like that. I forget the name. I think it's linear scaling law, where it shows that if you increase your batch
size or the number of training examples per update by n, you should also scale your learning rate by n.
So as you increase your batch size, you should increase your learning rate directly
proportionally. So I think the math behind this is a bit involved, and also it's more of an empirical rule of thumb.
So people have tried to show mathematical proofs for why this could be useful. But based on the variation of gradients in your batch
and the number of gradients you calculate per batch, et cetera, but really this is just
shown empirically to be true for a large number of problems. So this is a good rule of thumb. If you have a winning recipe but you
want to increase the batch size, then also increase your learning rate by the same amount.
Cool. And then the final thing I'll touch upon very briefly is this idea of second-order optimization, which
uses the Hessian that someone asked a question about earlier, too. So we won't talk about this very much in depth, but just to let you know this exists.
It's not something we cover in the course very much. But the basic idea is right now we're using the gradient
to form a linear approximation of basically, where's the downward direction where we're trying to traverse this loss landscape.
And we just look at the direction and we take a general step in that direction. And we added fancy things like momentum and the RMSProp
where we're decelerating along the steep directions. But this is the basic idea. We're using this gradient at each time step.
The idea of the Hessian is instead of using the gradient, you basically try to fit a quadratic or a second degree
polynomial to your function based on the derivatives at that point or the Hessians at that point.
And you then try to find the minimum this way. And in certain optimization problems
this actually works extremely well. But generally, we don't use it in deep learning because it requires two things.
So one, you have to do this Taylor series expansion, whereas right now we're just doing the first part where we're taking the derivative, but you would
need to be able to calculate the second mixed derivatives, which is already maybe difficult. And then on top of that,
this mixed derivative of all of your parameters
in your model by all the other parameters in your model can get very large as you have these many million or billion
parameter neural networks. So in practice, we don't use it because these matrices become
way too large. And so you run out of memory on your computer if you try to run it. Specifically, you're on a GPU memory.
But if you're training a smaller model or if you're OK with spending much more time to get better
steps towards your minimum, then maybe you want to look into this. Depends on the problem set, but for smaller models
this actually works quite well. But for these large neural networks we're training, we basically never do this due to the memory restrictions.
And all the time you spent computationally trying to calculate the Hessian, et cetera, you would rather just see more data during training.
All right. So some, I guess, concluding thoughts for you
all that can be useful. So Adam or AdamW is a really good default choice for training your first model if you're working on a new problem.
In a domain, I would recommend it. And it could even work OK, even if you do constant learning rate.
So usually people will try Adam AdamW with constant learning rate or with a linear warm up, and then a cosine decay those are like a really popular combination.
Also, I think, SGD and momentum can sometimes outperform Adam. But the tricky thing is because you generally
have to tune the values more, so you have to try many more learning rates because you
don't have this RMSProp term to account for the steep directions. And also you might have to try different scheduling values,
whereas in practice, Adam's best by test. People have tried it a bunch of different domains and it works very well. It's very adaptive to the loss landscape.
If you're doing a full-batch update where you're already, at each step, you can fit basically, your entire training set into your batch size,
you might want to look beyond first-order optimization into second-order and beyond, because it seems like your data
set's not very large, or maybe your model is not very large, and you could potentially, benefit from having these non-linear update steps
and computing more sophisticated strategies for going down trying to find the minimum here.
Yeah, so I think we're essentially done with the lecture. I'll give some slides about looking forward.
So how do we optimize more complex functions than linear models, which is what we covered in this lecture?
And next lecture specifically, we'll be looking at neural networks, which is very exciting topic.
A neural network, the we'll discuss in class, is basically, you have two of these weight matrices
now, one for each layer. And you have something called a non-linearity sort of stuck
between. So in this case, the most common-- sorry, not the most common, but the most simple one is just this ReLU function, which you'll learn about more.
But the basic idea is now we have two weight matrices, and we have this additional function that's done in between the weight matrix calculations.
This is nice because, as I said, it's nonlinear. So if we're trying to build a linear classifier to classify
data like this, you'll run into an issue where the blue points and the red points are not linearly separable.
But maybe there's some transformations we can do or through many layers of a model, we can eventually transform the data
into a way in which it is separable by a line, which would be our then final layer of the model.
[AUDIO LOGO]


As you can see on this slide, today, we are going to talk about neural networks and backpropagation.
Which is actually the process-- early years, I was studying this,
I was often referring to it as the magical process that
lets the neural networks learn from their own mistakes, pretty much like humans but in a more organized fashion,
and also using a little bit more math. So let's dive into the topic.
I'm sure this is going to be exciting. And this is laying the foundation
for the rest of the quarter. Every single algorithm that we will be discussing in the future
without even mentioning is using a form of backpropagation. And so that's why understanding this lecture and the topics
is very important. OK, in keeping us with the tradition,
let's cover what we've talked about so far.
So I'm sure you now remember what we talked about last time.
We said, how we can form the objective functions, or loss
functions, what we call here. And then we talked about regularization.
But to do that, we formulated everything
through the x, y, defining the pairs and a scoring function.
Which, in this case, we are using a linear scoring function, as you can see, and also defining,
ultimately, this loss function. So this graph that you see on the right is what we drew, showing all the process, the entire process
of learning. There has been some questions.
Questions in the last lecture and also even before that,
that why we are only using the softmax function. I wanted to reiterate that it's not the only loss function
that we have and we use. It's one of the most widely used in deep learning and building,
especially for the task of classification. But there are so many other options
that we use for other tasks, for different tasks. Even for the task of classification,
if you've looked at the slides that we've shared on the website, I included this hinge loss,
or used to be called SVM loss in the reading
assignments in lecture two. So in the slides, we had examples and everything
around the topic of hinge loss.
It is also one of those widely used loss functions, especially in the early years of neural networks.
And just to give you a high level understanding of what it is, this is a loss function, that unlike softmax, does not
turn the scores into probabilities. So turning them into probabilities is not the only option.
So we can use other forms. This function encourages the score of--
let me highlight here-- the score of the correct items, which
is defined by Syi to be higher than the scores
of all other items Sj. You can see the condition here, creating a value of 0
if the condition is true. And otherwise, what it does is--
so as I said, it encourages the score of the correct item
to be higher than the scores of all other items by at least a margin.
That number one that you see there is the margin that it creates. And then if the condition is violated,
the loss increases proportionally from the margin.
And this is the visualization-- so creating this visualization of the function.
So this promotes correct scores by penalizing cases,
where irrelevant items are scored too highly. So again, refer to reading assignment in lecture two
for examples and to get better understanding of that.
Next, we have talked about general optimization, how to find the best parameters, W, for the neural network.
And in doing so, we talked a little bit about this loss landscape being as a large valley as shown
in this image. And every point on that valley is a different set
of weight parameters. And we wanted to find the set of parameters, W, that
minimizes that loss landscape. We talked about the fact that the key
is being able to take the gradient of the loss function, L, with respect to W and use
the gradient for optimization in a step-by-step manner.
Which gave us the gradient descent algorithm. So the weights are basically updated.
Although it's very hard for me to see from this distance, what I'm pointing to, but I can guess.
So anyways, in order to walk down
the loss landscape towards the minimum value, a step size is defined and we often
get to take one step with respect to a step size
in the negative direction of the gradient. So this was the gradient descent algorithm.
And in order to optimize, we talked about two different approaches of numerical gradient
and analytical gradient, both of which having pros and cons.
And we discussed in practice to derive analytical gradients--
in practice, we derive analytical gradients. And often, if it's hard to do the implementation and the math
and everything, we check our implementations with numerical gradients.
And one of the other challenges we talked about was the use of incorporating the loss function and its gradients
on the entire data set. So if you have a large data set, it's very expensive
to run the loss function and the derivative on the entire data
set. And that's why we talked about the idea of mini batches, using a number of examples sampled from the data set,
often maybe 32, 64, or 128, or 256.
And that subsampled data is used for identifying the gradients
and then taking the steps towards the minimum.
And beyond SGD and stochastic gradient descent,
we talked about some optimizations of SGD with Momentum, RMSProp, and Adam optimizer.
And there were a lot of details that I would refer you to the lecture, the third lecture,
if you have any specific questions about this.
And then one of the other things that we talked about was the importance of the learning rate
and scheduling the learning rate. And in some of the optimizers, we often try to start with a larger value of the learning rate
and then start using different types of decaying the learning
rate, or reducing its value by a factor.
And this is normally needed in many optimizers.
But in some of the more recent ones, Adam and its variants, we often do not need to manually, or explicitly decrease
that because that is encoded into the optimizer itself.
So with that, I want us to get to the topic of neural networks
and see how we can actually build neural networks and solve more exciting and harder problems.
So we've so far talked about this function, linear function,
of W multiplied by x. And that is the most basic neural network
that could be defined as just one layer. We will be talking about the layers.
And what I want you to pay attention to here
are these dimensions D and C, which are the dimensionality of the input data,
input x, or the number of features. And C is the number of classes, basically, the number
of outputs, nodes, or neurons, whatever number of outputs we need.
And in order to create a neural network at a second layer,
we can define a new set of weights referred to as W2 here.
And we apply those to the previous layer
of W1 multiplied by x. Again, pay attention to the dimensionalities
here that we have the C number of outputs and D as the number of input features.
But then you also define H, and that defines the number of neurons, the number of hidden layer
nodes, or neurons. That's one point. The second point is this max function
that we'll be coming back to. And we'll explain what it is and what it means.
What the max operation is doing here is to create a non-linearity between
the linear transformations done by W1 and W2.
And this is actually a very, very important part of the process.
I will talk a little bit about the non-linearity but also look at this last part before I forget.
In practice, that's right that we are only including W and x, as we talked about this in the first and second lecture.
We also incorporate a bias just to have a complete framework.
So in practice, we also have bias, but we don't write it here for the sake of simplicity.
Anyways, the max operation is creating the nonlinearity.
And it's actually very important because, as we talked about the linear classifiers in the last few lectures,
we said, we mentioned that there are so many different problems that we can't separate the samples with just
one single line. This was one of the examples that in order to be able to solve this problem with neural networks,
with linear functions, we need some sort of nonlinear transformation from the original space to a new space.
And now, in the new space, you see that they are separable, using a line.
So in this case, it's a nonlinear transformation
between the input and then the second space, which is mapping the x and y to their polar coordinates, r
and theta. But again, this is just one example. There are so many other examples, too.
So with this example, let's go back to-- oops,
let's go back to our definition of the two layer neural network.
As you've probably seen in the literature and outside this class, these types
of networks which only depend on weights and inputs and layers
and so on, there are no other operations than multiplication, are often referred to as fully connected networks,
or multi-layer perceptrons, MLPs. So that's one thing.
And we can actually stack more and more layers to create better, more larger networks.
And in this case, again, pay attention to the dimensionalities and the hidden layers
that we have in the middle and the dimensionalities that
do match one after the other. So back to this visual representation of what
the neural network is doing.
We talked about this when we had the linear representations, that often what happens is the network, through the weights,
is learning some sort of templates. If you remember last week, we were
talking about these templates that are being learned. So again, I'm saying, templates, they're not.
I mean, they are some representatives of the images but from the data, depending on what data it was trained on.
So these templates in what we discussed last week
were generated by these 10 outputs by applying the W's on top of the input neurons.
So with that, now that we have multiple layers, more layers,
now we can actually create some more templates. Now, we have a layer in the middle that can actually
create 100 templates, as opposed to just 10 for a linear classifier.
Although we still have those 10 as well. And this, again, in a very high level-- from a very high level
understanding point of view, I'm telling you what this means. When we have these 100 neurons in the middle,
we are giving the network the power to create templates for not entire objects
but maybe parts of the object. For example, the classes that you see here, we had bird, cat, deer, dog, frog, horse, they all have eyes.
So one of those 10 templates, 100 templates could probably be a part of the object that could be shared
between all of the classes. So from a high level point of view and understanding these can form templates.
And when we come back to the topics of visualization and what we learned from the neural networks, this topic,
we'll uncover more details about what I'm talking about right now. So back to the function max.
We talked about max function, the nonlinearity that is created here. And in neural network terminology,
we call that an activation function. And it's actually playing a very, very important role,
a pivotal role, in building the model, building a neural network.
Let's answer this question that we have on the slide. What happens if we try to build a neural network without one
of these activation functions, let's say, the max function? This will be our function if I remove the max.
So it would be W2 multiply by W1 by x. What would happen here?
Yes, exactly. So as you can guess and correctly, you mentioned,
the multiplication of W2 by W1 could actually
be replaced easily with another matrix, W3. And then your function becomes just a linear function.
So everything could be lumped together. So we need some sort of non-linearity in the middle to be able to give us the power
to solve non-linear problems. The function that we just talked about is a ReLU.
It's the rectified linear unit. It's a very popular function, activation function,
used in neural networks. While there are so many other variants that
have been tested in many other architectures and even in the more modern architectures, one
of the problems that ReLU has is, it sometimes creates dead neurons
because it's making everything equal to 0, if it's not positive.
So in order to avoid the dead neurons, leaky ReLU,
with this type of modeling, or ELU,
that the exponential linear unit are other options.
ELU is a little bit better because it has a better zero-centered function.
And then there are some newer variations, GeLU, Gaussian,
or linear unit. Or I don't know, I've heard both variations, ELU and GeLU--
so could be used. They are often used more often in neural architecture
in transformers. And we also have SiLU, or switch.
It's the sigmoid linear unit that, one,
is also used in some of the modern CNNR architectures. Google was using this for some of the variations
of their models and also in EfficientNet. Other than these, there are functions like sigmoid and Tanh,
or Tanh that are often also used as activation functions.
Although they do have a few problems because they do squash values in a narrow range.
And that sometimes results in vanishing gradients. So we often do not use sigmoid or Tanh
in the middle of the neural networks. They are often used in the later layers, where
we want to, for example, binarize the outputs and things like that.
So as I said, ReLU is often a good default choice. It's very much used in many architectures.
And there are so many variations of the same function that we talked about.
I want to summarize what we've talked about and then answer some questions.
So we did talk about different adding layers and so on.
But I want to highlight that activation functions are often functions that are operating in the layers.
And we also have W's, which define the weights mapping between the previous layer
and the next layer. Again, these are fully connected neural networks
with very simple implementations.
What we only need is to be able to define an activation function.
And in this example, if you look at the example, we have the sigmoid function defined as the activation
function and very easily using that activation. The first and the second layers of the hidden values,
hidden neurons, are calculated by applying W1 by x and then
also the bias and then applying the function, the activation function.
And then same for H2, and the output will be very simply the dot product between the W3
and the last layer of hidden values, creating the output layer.
I'll stop here to answer some questions if there are any. And then, we'll love to continue it.
That is a great question. And the question is, how would we choose for a new problem which of these activation functions
to use? The short answer to your question is yes, it's empirical in most cases.
But we often start with value, or we go with standard activation functions
being used for those specific architectures. As I mentioned, there are activation functions
that are often commonly used in CNNs, or in transformers
and different architectures. So we often go with the ones that are tested before.
But yes, it's mostly empirical. If you're designing a new network for a new problem,
then that's one of your choices that you have to make, very much similar to other hyperparameters.
So the question here is, what is the attribute that is basically common between all of these activation
functions and what it really does? I will give you some examples.
And I'll go into some of the details of what these activation functions are doing.
Basically, the main and the most important common characteristic
here is to create nonlinearity. We're not using a linear function as the activation.
So creating some sort of nonlinearity is something that makes it very important.
And why do we have so many variations? I told you a little bit about the problems with vanishing gradients.
I told you a little bit about differentiability of the functions.
They should be differentiable because we are using them in neural network. And sometimes, having a proper zero-centered value
and a smooth function makes it much faster to get converging networks.
So there are so many different factors. These are the main ones that I told you and talked about,
which play an important role for defining, or designing these functions.
I'll talk a little bit more about it when I go into details of the functions.
In all of the layers, we often use same activation functions.
But as I said, sometimes, in the later layers, or the output layer, we use a activation sigmoid function
and/or tangent function, but commonly yes.
And the question was, if we use the same across the networks,
the entire network, same function for all of the neurons? OK, continuing to what we were talking
about, which is the implementation of these models,
these neural network. So there is a very simple way.
I mean, building a neural network, a two layer neural network, in Python is just less than 20 lines of code.
Very simple, define our network as I talked about the dimensionalities.
N is the number of samples. D_in is the dimensionality of the input.
And D_out is the dimensionality of the output. And h, the number of neurons in the hidden layer.
And we talked about-- this is just creating x and y and randomly initializing W's.
Then we have the forward pass, which means applying W's to the inputs, layer by layer,
and ultimately creating the output, the predicted wise,
and finally calculating the loss function and outputting that loss value.
After the forward pass, we need an optimization process, a way
to calculate the analytical gradients and use those gradients that are created
to run gradient descent to optimize W1 and W2,
basically taking one step towards the optimal value of the network.
But this part, calculating the analytical gradient, is the most important part in here
that we haven't very much gone into. So this is the-- almost the rest of this lecture is
about making this work and scale in different settings.
So after training and building such a neural network,
depending on how many nodes we use in the hidden layer,
you see that we can identify, we can get different patterns of separation between the two
classes. And more neurons often means more capacity to learn more complex functions and better separation
of the nodes, the points.
If you take a look at this, this is very much similar to this.
This pattern I'm showing here is similar to the one that I showed in the second lecture, where we are talking
about k nearest neighbor. And when we had only k equal to 1, the one nearest neighbor
framework, it was very much similar to using more neurons. So same type of arguments happen here
that if we give a lot of capacity to the network, then we will have some overfitting problems.
We won't be able to generalize to unseen data. But there are many different solutions for this as well.
And one thing that-- as a rule of thumb, what I want to highlight here for you
is to not use the size of the neural network as a regularizer. We don't often use that as a hyperparameter
to finetune this network size. Although, we experiment with different values of the network
size and related hyperparameters. But what we often do is we go with a little bit of a bigger
network that we need. And then we use the regularization and this regularizer, and specifically,
this regularization hyperparameter
to check the different setups. So what we often tune is the regularization
and regularization hyperparameter and not necessarily the network size itself.
OK, this is the concept of neural networks in a nutshell.
But we have heard about neural networks and how they could be related to the biological--
there are some biological inspirations. So I'll talk a little bit about it, but there is a question.
Basically, your question is, why is the model more underfitting
when we increase the value of lambda here? Yes, so just to quickly answer that question,
the value of lambda is controlling how much contribution the regularizer should have in the overall loss.
And the larger contribution that you have on the regularizer--
and remember that regularizer was defined on W's. So it's constraining the W's.
It's giving you less freedom to the values on W's. So less freedom equals a little bit more generic boundaries,
not necessarily giving you those detailed values, or detailed parts of the boundaries.
So if you constrain the model too much, even with regularizer,
you're also going to get values like that, decision boundaries like that.
Yes, the right regularizer always overfits-- it prevents overfitting.
Again, you are creating a compromise, a balance between the loss, like predicting the right output.
So the first part of the loss is predicting the right output. The second part is only playing with the values of the weights,
doesn't care about the outputs anymore. If you overweight this, you're not going to get very good classifiers.
So creating a balance, regularizer is always good. But nothing is good if you use too much of it.
Can you go over again why we would want to choose the regularization rather than the size [INAUDIBLE]?
So there are many different reasons. One of them is size of the network.
You're building the networks. You're going to build networks that, sometimes, that you have to run them for few days
to get some results. So networks, what we often do is,
we start increasing the number of parameters in networks, until we see some levels of overfitting.
So that's the time that we know that the network is actually understanding the patterns in the data
and is now able to memorize the data. And that's the time that we try to minimize the overfitting
by regularizing the network. So regularization plays an important factor there.
So if we go too high on the number of parameters, number
of complexity of the network, then that's going to be causing a problem. We never often do that.
We often, for a new problem, start with smaller networks and increase that after with--
correct that with the regularizer. For a given problem, how do we know
how many neurons we need to solve the problem? That's based on empirical research work
and looking at other similar type of-- there is no one prescription for all.
You have to look at other counterparts, other types of networks that were trained on similar data,
start from that range. And then often, you do a number of experiments
yourself to balance and increase or decrease the complexity of the network. So it's often and always pretty much bound to exploration.
So your question is, are there any theoretical and foundational work done to see which ones to use,
which activation functions to use, and how many layers to use? There are so many research and papers
out analyzing these and also some methods for optimizing all of these meta or hyperparameters
of the networks. We are not going to get into them in detail because, again, a big part of it is
based on-- very much dependent on the data set, the problem you're solving. And so the best answer to your question
is, yes, there are some works out there. But again, each of those make assumptions
that may not be necessarily true for your application, or problem.
So what happens is, there are some biological inspirations.
Again, these inspirations are very much very loose. If there is a neuroscientist sitting here,
or is watching online, do not take all of the examples
that I'm giving you, or talking about as the ground truth.
But generally, what happens in neurons-- and this is a visualization of a neuron--
it does have a cell body that often aggregates
the impulses carried through dendrites to the cell body
itself, cell body. And then using axons, those impulses are carried away to other neurons.
This is very much similar to what we are doing in our neural networks. We often have a function that captures
the signals, all of the previous impulses,
activations from the previous layers. And in the cell body, that function
is operated on the inputs and outputs the activations
and passes them to the next layer, next neuron. And that's, basically, why we need some sort of activation
function here to create the impulses to increase,
or decrease the values. So with that, again, there are many differences
between biological neurons and how they could actually be very more complex than what neural networks
we build look like. But generally, there are common concepts.
Often, the neural networks that we build are organized into regular patterns. And those patterns are because we
want to have better computational efficiency when we implement the neural networks.
Although there has been research creating these complex neural networks and trying to optimize,
but again, in terms of results, they are almost comparable with the regular functions,
regular neural networks that we often build and we'll be talking about in this class.
I can't warn you enough on being careful with your brain
analogies and how this could be interpreted.
So there are so many differences. And I'll just stop here and would
be happy to discuss if anybody was interested in the neuroscience aspect of things as well.
So plugging everything in, we did have a scoring function.
This scoring function turns the inputs through some W's weight vectors, or weight matrices into scores.
And what we often use as the loss function for the network
is using those scores either through hinge loss, or softmax, or other variations.
And in addition to that, we defined regularizers,
which ultimately give us the total loss of the data loss plus regularizer.
And we talked about this fact that in order to be able to optimize W1 and W2,
what we need is to be able to take the derivative of, the partial derivative of L with respect
to W1 and W2, partial L by W1 and W2.
There are so many different details that we have to be aware of.
First, building these functions and then taking the derivatives
and writing them down is often tedious. There are lots of matrix calculations
and need a lot of work on the paper before you can actually implement a neural network.
The other challenge, the other problem is, what if you want to change the loss slightly
different from what we have done in the paper, all of the calculations over?
So in that case, again, we have to redo the entire thing.
And finally, this becomes intractable and, sometimes,
infeasible if the loss function is complex. So with complex functions, that's going to be even harder.
But there is a better idea, something that is often used in our implementations.
And I'm going to go into a few examples today just to make sure everybody is on the same page
and understands these topics. And that is computational graphs and the idea of backpropagation.
Computational graphs are putting together all of the operations in the neural network
and creating that step-by-step thing and start from the inputs and all of the parameters
that are basically needed and get the loss as the final output, final layer.
So in this case, we had a loss function, which could be a softmax function,
or a hinge loss function. Whatever it is, it's the loss function, which is added to the regularizer, the function RW.
And R has W as its input. So these two added together calculate, or create the loss.
And before doing the, or having the loss calculated,
we often also need to aggregate x and W and create the score.
This is a multiplication function. This is actually very useful because most
of the neural networks that we build are also they have graphical card representations. And all of these complex functions
could be shown with the same framework. And then we can use this and build their computation graph,
starting from input image or input data. There are a bunch of weights throughout the network.
And finally, there is the loss function.
And again, this is useful because there are some complex neural networks, like this neural
Turing machine. And that is actually used for temporal and sequential data.
So there is a lot of unrolling of this machine. And if we have to do all of the work manually by hand,
this is going to be intractable and not feasible.
And that's why when we build this computational graph,
the solution to that is backpropagation.
And I want to start with a very simple example. So we start with a function f of x, y, and z,
which is x plus y multiplied by z. And if I draw the computational graph for this function,
you see we have an operation, which is the addition
operation between x and y. And then we have a multiplication
between that addition of x and y multiplied by z.
So given an input setup of x equal to minus 2, y equal to 5,
and z equal to minus 4, now actually, we can make all of the calculations
for and do this, the forward pass,
stepping forward in the neural network. The first step is adding x and y, which gives us 3.
And in order to be able to understand the steps and step-by-step, I'm giving a name to it.
So q equals x plus y. And if I want to calculate the partial derivatives of q
with respect to both x and y, it's very simple because we have the formulation here between q
and x and y. The formulation is there. The derivatives, the partial q by x equals 1 and partial q by y
equals 1 as well. So this is a simple setup.
We know it exists. So just keep it in the back of our minds. Then the second operation is f equals q multiplied by z.
Again, since we have this function, it's very easy to write the partial derivatives.
Partial f by q equals z. And f by z equals q.
So it's swap between z and q.
I'm hoping that everybody knows all of these from linear algebra. So if you don't, you should definitely
check it out and remind yourself because these are actually very, very important algebra in general
for the rest of the quarter. What we want and what we need in this setup,
and to complete this example of backpropagation, we need the partial derivative of f with respect
to x, y, and z.
How we start and how our backpropagation implements this is to start at the front of the net--
at the end of the network. And we start going back, backpropagating
all of the gradients. And this is basically a recursive process
that will be running. So derivative of f with respect to f is what?
It's the thing with respect to itself. So it's always the last part, the derivative
of loss function with respect to itself is always 1.
If I want to backprop, the most immediate one is z.
You can see here that we have z. And for this one, if I calculate the derivative of f with respect
to z, we already have it. F with respect to z is equal to q.
So whatever the value of q is goes to this as the gradient
as well. Next, we have q. Q is the next one-- our next one that is directly connected to f.
So this is also easy to compute because we have derivative of f with respect to q.
We have also already calculated that it's equal to z. Whatever z is, that's the value of derivative here minus 4.
Next, we have y, which is directly before q.
And we know that y and f, although we need derivative of f with respect to y, but y and f
are not directly connected. And that's where we use the chain rule, where
we split the calculation of derivatives with respect
to the variable in the middle. So partial f by y equals to partial f by q, q by y.
So this is how the chain rule could be written in this case.
And now, I want to introduce you to two important new terms-- local gradient and upstream gradient.
Upstream gradient is often the gradient that comes from the end of the network to this current node
that we are in. And then the local gradient is the gradient
of the nodes, what the input of the node is, with a gradient of its output with respect
to its input. So it's the local gradient. So defining these is actually not too hard because f by q,
you already have the value. Q by y, we also already have the value.
So it's 1 multiplied by z, and the value will become minus 4.
Same story, and it's for the other variable, x.
Here, the local gradient upstream could, again, be written down with this chain rule.
And it also results in minus 4 and gives us--
because in both cases, the gradient with respect to x or y
was already 1. So both of them get the same value. So with this computational setup and the computational graph,
it becomes very easy to modularize what we want to do. For every single node in the neural network,
having x and y as input, or whatever else, and z as the output, what we need are, first,
the local gradients. Which we can always-- we have the function f.
It's a function of x and y. So the gradient of output with respect to each of the inputs,
it's easy to calculate for every single node. And what we need to be able to backpropagate
is the upstream gradient. And the backpropagation process is giving us
the power to get this upstream gradient as step-by-step. So when we are at this node, we also
have the upstream gradient already calculated from the future nodes.
And that's what we need.
What we can do after this is just to multiply the upstream gradient with the local gradient
and create what now we call downstream gradients. So the downstream gradients are going
to be upstream gradients for the previous layers. So that's how we calculate that for x,
same story when it comes to y. So this whole process gives us the power
to create and calculate all of these completely locally and a step-by-step go backwards
and give it to the previous nodes so they can continue their process. So again, this is one of the most fundamental operations
in all of neural networks and many optimization processes involving multiple layers of information.
If I understand the question correctly, you're saying, how can we understand this, intuitively, what the gradients are doing?
So let's take one step back and see why we are here to begin with.
What we needed was to identify to calculate the gradients of the loss function
with respect to W1 and W2 and W's in general, to be able to take a step in the negative direction
of, in the opposite direction of the gradients to be able to find the optimal value, optimal loss.
So in order to do that, we need gradient of L loss
with respect to everything. So what we are doing is, we are just moving gradient of L
with respect to all variables in the network, back to every single value of the network,
without sitting down and writing the function for the entire network. If the network has 100 layers, we're
not going to be sitting down and writing the function for all of the 100 layers separately. This is how we backpropagate step-by-step
to get the values that we need for that optimization process of every single weight that is going to be incorporated
in the network. OK, another example, so this is a little bit
more complex function, a function of weights and x. And we have 1 over 1 plus e to the power of linear combination
of x and w. So there are a bunch of multiplications, additions,
negation, and the exp function, and ultimately,
the 1 over whatever we calculated function. So with all of those, let's look at this example that we have,
specific values for W0, x0, W1, x1, and W2.
With these given values, we can do the forward pass, calculate every single value that we have in this process.
And just to remind you, we do have some of the details, some of the--
we know for an exp function, e to the power of x,
what its derivative is with respect to x constant multiplication.
Always, the derivative is the constant value itself, 1 over x, as a derivative of minus 1 over x2.
These are, again, what we know from algebra. And if it's a constant addition, it's always,
the derivative is equal to 1. So as I said, always in the very beginning
at the end of the network, the derivative of L with respect to L is always equal to 1.
So that's where we start using this rule,
the derivative of function 1/x. Now, we can calculate-- upstream,
I said, it's 1 always at the end. The local gradient could be minus 1 over x2.
What is the value of x? Whatever the input is. So this calculation results in minus 0.53.
So minus 0.53 is the downstream gradient, which defines the upstream gradient for the next one.
And in the next, again, the function here is just the constant addition,
where we know that the local gradient equals to 1. So 1 multiplied by upstream gradient, same value, goes back.
And next step is the exp function. So for that, again, the upstream,
we already have the value. For the local gradient, it's e to the power of x.
What is x? The input of this step minus 1. So calculating this will give us minus 0.2.
And this goes back to the next step. Here, we, again, have a multiplication
with a constant number, which defines the local gradient equal to that number, or that constant value,
and defining the new gradient, downstream gradient.
And going back, now here, we have an addition function, where we are getting some data, some information-- sorry,
two inputs of the different values here.
And again, if you want to calculate the upstream gradient, it's 0.2. Already, we have it. The downstream, the local gradients will be equal to 1
because it's just an addition between two values. And an addition, the derivative of x
plus y with respect to both x and y is always 1. So both inputs will be the same.
Then We have multiplication operations with multiplication upstream gradient.
Again, we have the values. And the local gradients with respect to a multiplication
is, if we always have, say, for example, a multiplied by x, the derivative of this with respect
to x is always the other variable. So here, for the first one, it's minus 1,
which is the value of x. And for the second one, it's 2, which is the value of w. So the other variable, whatever the value it has.
So with that, we can calculate everything and then also calculate the ones with respect to W1 and x1.
Again, we made all of these calculations, so we can identify how much W should
be changed in order to step towards the optimal point
in the network. So this was another example. There are so many different ways to draw a computational graph.
This was not the only one that I explained. So we can actually lump all of the functions together and define a sigmoid because this is basically
a sigmoid of a linear function. So the linear function could be here.
And then all of these operations could be defined as sigmoid. And actually, sigmoid is interesting and very useful
to use because the local gradient using sigmoid
is dependent on sigmoid itself. So the local gradient of sigmoid with respect to the variable x,
if we do the calculations and simplify, it's 1 minus sigmoid multiplied by the sigmoid of the same x.
So it's actually a very useful framework, useful function,
and easy. And in order to calculate the downstream gradient, again,
what the upstream gradient was, was value 1. And if I calculate the local gradient, which
is this function, replacing x with what the input was, which is 1, it's how this will be calculated multiplied by 1
will be 0.2. Which is actually the exact same value that we had from before doing it separately.
I want to summarize and say that there
are few patterns in the data, often very much in for the nodes
that we can actually memorize. There is add gate for the add gate.
It's always a gradient distributor. Because of the properties of addition that I explained,
the gradients will remain the same as whatever its input is.
For the multiplication gate, it's a swap function.
Again, I told you, gradient of xy with respect to x is y, with respect to y is x.
So it's a swap. And then there is copy gate.
And the copy gate, the operation that happens is just an addition of what is coming to the network--
to the node, or the gate. And then ultimately, there is a max gate, which is actually
something that we use quite often, very much similar to the ReLU function. That max gate has the gradient of--
because it's taking a max between its inputs. So whichever the max value was, you just
route the gradients towards that direction. So with that, it's very simple to now implement
a neural network, forward pass, compute all of the steps. And then in the backward pass, we
start computing the gradients. In a step-by-step, I explained that the gradient of the loss function with respect to itself is always 1.
And then we start from the end of the network and go up.
You can see here, that we are going up. So this is the sigmoid function calculating the gradients,
then going up. That was the add gate. We had another add gate.
And then we had two multiply gates, which basically, very simply, gives us the implementations.
And with this type of formulation, what we can do is just do some--
modularize every function in neural network
and create the forward and backward APIs for every single function that we need in the neural network.
So in this case, this is a multiplication gate that-- because for multiplication, we need
to access the inputs for use in the backward pass.
We often save them, memorize them, but then calculate the forward pass values and then
the backward pass, calculate the gradients. So this means we can write our functions and put the forward
and backward passes all in. And this is how PyTorch operators right now look like.
If you look at the sigmoid layer, for example, it's just the forward pass. Although in this very function it's not implemented.
It's somewhere else in the C++ code, in the C code, that it's actually implemented in PyTorch.
But then the backward pass of sigmoid is also calculating the same function that we just talked about.
So far, what we've said-- and I actually covered most of the examples
that I wanted to cover in using the scalar values.
All of the examples were just scalar values. But we know that all of these operations
could actually be implemented in vector or matrix forms, just expanding on that piece here.
We talked about this, that with the scalar to scalar setting, so far, what we've talked about for any input x and y
being scalars. So the derivative will also be a scalar.
Which means if we change x by a small amount, how much the value of y will change?
If it's now vectorized and there are vectors, if x is a vector of n elements and y
is a scalar, a vector to a scalar derivative,
then in this case, the derivative will also be a vector. And every single element in that vector
means if we change x by a small value, that value,
then how much the amount of y changes, then the entire amount of y because it's just
one single value. And then there are also vector to vector frameworks,
where x and y, both of them are vectors tours of arbitrary size.
And M, in those cases, the derivatives will form a matrix, or what we call Jacobians.
And for each of the elements in x,
if it changes by a small amount, then this derivative tells us how much each element of y
will be changed. Again, look at the scripts here, they are not completely--
they're not the same. They could be different. For every single element in this Jacobian,
there is a clear meaning. And then how we can do, or see it and visualize it in here
is that if you want to backprop with vectors--
say, x, y, and z are vectors of size dx, dy, dz.
Again, the loss derivative, L, is--
the loss itself is always a scalar because that's always one value we want to minimize.
But then calculating the upstream gradient will result in also a vector dz, same size as its variable z.
And same story happens when it comes to downstream gradients.
In downstream gradients-- actually, before going to downstream, let me tell you
a little bit about the local gradients, where we have gradient of z with respect to x and y.
And in this case that's the part that I said there will be Jacobians because now,
the gradients will turn into matrices. So we have two Jacobian matrices here
defined by the size of their input multiplied by the size of the output.
And then this results in downstream gradients
that are multiplication of upstream and the local gradient.
And there, we get same size as the inputs x itself.
So we will have a vector again here because the input was a vector, same size,
in terms of the gradients.
I just mentioned that gradients of variables with respect to loss always have the same dimensionality
as the original variable itself, as also shown in this slide.
So backprop with vectors was this, just one example here.
Let's say we have a function, which is the max of 0 and x. That's the ReLU function.
So this is an element wise function that takes the inputs, takes the max between 0.
And if it's nonzero-- if it's non-negative, it passes through, otherwise replaces it with a 0.
Assume you get some upstream gradients and now, we need to build a Jacobian matrix here.
And this Jacobian matrix, in this case, because this is an element wise operation,
it doesn't have any dependence on any of the other inputs, only
the dependencies on the value itself. This is a very sparse matrix, only has value
on the main diagonal. And those values are actually either 0 or 1,
depending on if the max was actually taken, or a 0 was if the value was passed through,
or just the 0 was replaced with it in its place.
Multiplying it by the upstream gradient gives us the downstream gradient.
And this is how the calculations are done.
As I said, Jacobian here is sparse because in this case,
the operation is element wise. And that could actually be instead of--
in the backward pass, instead of calculating that huge, sparse Jacobian matrix, what
we do is just use these rule-based calculation of the gradient for this max function.
So we don't really store that matrix and do not calculate that because we
know how the function operates. And then this could also be extended
to matrices and even tensors. If the inputs are not vectors, they
are high dimensionality data. So in those cases, again, the gradients
with respect to the variables would be of the same size as that specific variable.
And calculating the upstream and downstream matrices
and derivatives is going to be done same as how we discussed
and showed earlier for vectors. And then when it comes to the local gradients, although--
however, it's going to be a huge matrix, a huge Jacobian because we have a matrix as the output
and the matrix as the input. And then the local gradients will be the same size as the multiplication of its input
size and the output size. So it's going to be a huge matrix by itself.
Let me give you an example. If this is input x and w as input
for a node for a gate with matrix multiplication
and generates this y as the output, calculating derivative of L with respect to y
gives us these Jacobian matrices. And say, we have a mini batch size of 64 and dimensionality
of those matrices is 4,096, then this means that, that Jacobian matrix, that huge Jacobian matrix will be over 256
gigabytes for just one single matrix multiplication.
So in order to simplify this, what we
do is, we try to look at the values and how they impact each other.
For example, what parts of y will be affected if one element of x gets impacted?
So there, xn and d, this specific one,
often affects just one row in the output.
And this basically helps us identify for calculating
each of these nodes. We don't need to create the huge Jacobian. We can actually write the backward pass functions
specifically for matrix multiplication in a more efficient way.
And I'm almost done. So you answer this question.
How much does xn, d affect the value of y and m.
So this is yn, m that is getting impacts from xn, d.
How much does it get impact? It means that what should I place, or put as its gradient with respect
to the specific value, xn, d?
Just to remind you, this is a multiplication operation.
In multiply gates, it should be a swap. So whatever the answer to this question, is something a value
in W? Remember that we had this multiplication gate, which was a swap multiplier.
So there is a swap happening here. So the value of x affecting y, one of the elements in y,
is going to be dependent on the W that
is in row D defined by the x matrix and column M defined by the y matrix.
So it's swapping the values. It's the same swap. But here now, we have to look at the giant matrices
and find which specific element it should be. And then based on that, we can actually
replace the entire thing with matrix multiplication and matrix
operations. The gradient of L with respect to x will be defined as this simple matrix operation.
And then the gradient of L with respect to W will be defined as this very simple multiplication.
Again, swap here, for x, we include the entire w. For w, we include the entire x and do the multiplications.
These formulas makes it easy to implement larger and harder operations and get them implemented
in the backward passes. All right, we're done.
Just to summarize, we talked today about fully connected neural networks. We went through all the steps needed for backpropagation,
the forward passes, backward passes. And next session, we will be getting
into the topic of convolutional neural networks. Thank you.

Today we're going to be talking about image classification with CNNs. So you might be wondering, who am I. I'm a new face.
You haven't seen me before in this class. I'm Justin, I'm the fourth mystery instructor in this class. I think my picture's been on the website,
but it's my first time here today. And a little about me. I did my PhD here at Stanford from 2012 to 2018,
working with [INAUDIBLE] on deep learning, computer vision, pretty much all tasks in computer vision around that time.
During my time here at Stanford, I was lucky enough to initiate CS231N with Andre
and [INAUDIBLE] and others and teach it, quite a few times 2015, '16, '17 and '18 and '19.
At Stanford after that, I spent time at Facebook AI research doing all kinds of deep learning computer vision stuff there.
And I was a faculty member at University of Michigan. And there I taught basically the same class a couple more times.
So I've taught this class a couple times, but it's been a while since I've been here, and most recently, I've been doing a startup called
World Labs with [INAUDIBLE]. And that's just a little bit about me. Now, about where we are on this class.
So we're at an interesting point in the class right now, where the class is divided up into these couple different segments.
And we've basically finished the first segment. The first segment is basically around deep learning basics. And this is really cool because now all the stuff that you've
seen in four lectures is basically all the fundamentals of deep learning. You basically know this whole pipeline
of what is the basic pieces that go into building a deep learning system. So I thought it's useful here at the beginning of this inflection
point to just step back and recap some of the major themes that we've seen in the first bit of the course.
So the first is this idea of image classification with linear classifiers. And this was meant as a toy problem,
to give you a sense of a problem you might solve with deep learning, where usually the first step in solving a deep learning problem
is to define your problem in a way where it is you take input, some grid of numbers, some tensors,
you produce as output some tensors, and you want to formalize this problem as some input output of tensors.
And we do that in the image classification setting by saying that we want to classify images into a bunch of human understandable categories,
the inputs are going to be these grids of pixel values, which are arranged in three dimensional tensors.
The outputs are going to be scores, giving us the affinity or the degree to which we have one score per category
or you define a set of categories in advance, and the network is supposed to predict high scores for categories that the image is likely to be,
low scores for the categories that the image is likely to be not. And then we can define--
we can set up a problem use a weight matrix, multiply that against the image pixels and predict these scores.
And we saw that there's a couple of different viewpoints, a couple different ways that we can interpret these linear classifiers.
And this basically sets up a functional form saying that we can predict scores for images if only we have a weight matrix w.
So then the question is, how do we select a good weight matrix w? And for that, we go to loss functions.
So loss functions are these things that tell us given a particular value of a weight matrix,
given a particular data set, how well does this weight matrix fit to solve the problem on this data set.
And in particular, we saw some examples of loss functions that are commonly used for classification problems,
including the softmax loss and probably the SVM loss as well. And then now, OK, so now we've gotten a little bit
farther along in our problem. We've set up the problem of image classification. We have a model for solving that problem using
linear classifiers. We have a way to tell if our solutions are good using a loss function, but now we actually need
to search for a good solution in that space. And that's where optimization comes in. So now that we-- now you think of the-- now
you think of defining this optimization landscape, where on the x-axis or on the horizontal plane
are all the different possible settings of your weight matrix. And then the loss function is basically a height of this plane, where a high loss function is bad
because losing things is bad. So you want low loss. So the purpose of optimization is to somehow traverse this space, slide down this manifold,
and find a point at the bottom of very low loss. And now each point in this space corresponds to a weight matrix.
So by sliding down that space, we're going to find a good weight matrix that solves our problem and gives us a good solution to our task.
And in particular, we saw a couple of different commonly used optimization algorithms that are used in deep learning pipelines; stochastic gradient
descent, usually with momentum, RMSProp, Adam. And one interesting topical note is
that right now, one of the biggest deep learning research conferences is ICLR, International Conference
on Learning Representations. And just yesterday, I cleared 2025, gave their test of Time Award to the Adam paper
because the paper that introduced this Adam optimizer was published at ICLR 10 years ago in 2015.
So a lot of academic conferences, they'll tend to give test of time awards to some of the most impactful papers from 10 years ago.
And just yesterday, the Adam optimizer that you guys have been learning-- that you guys saw in this class got this very prestigious test of Time Award
at ICLR 2025. So I thought that was pretty cool in a nice way to connect what you've been learning
stuff that's happening right now in the machine learning community. So then now we basically-- at this point
we've got our linear classifiers, we've got our loss functions. We can optimize them. Now, we're almost good to go.
But we ran into a problem is that the linear classifiers that we started with are actually not very powerful.
And we saw this from- we saw two different ways of attacking this deficiency in linear classifiers.
One was from the visual viewpoint, where you can interpret a linear classifier by thinking about-- by thinking of that learned weight
matrix as an image where you learn one image template for each of the categories that you're trying to-- that you're trying to classify against.
And if you think about it that way, we realize that the weights of your linear classifier, each row of that weight matrix is one template.
So the linear classifier basically needs to summarize all of its knowledge about each category into just one template.
And that's a difficult-- that's just not a very powerful classifier. So then you can-- this shows up in these visualized templates
of a learned linear classifier, where you can see that for categories like the car,
this car looks like a red blob. But cars don't have to be red, right? What if your car was blue or purple or green or something
else? There's just no good way for a linear classifier to caption this-- capture this notion of there might be different appearances
for an object for each category, or from the geometric viewpoint, if we imagine these each point of our data set
as some point in high dimensional space, then a linear classifier is basically going in and carving up that space with hyperplanes.
So that's really good if all your categories actually do lie in linearly separable regions of your space,
but there's no reason to expect that to be true in general. So these are both two big deficiencies that we ran into when looking at these linear classifiers as
applied to image classification problems. And that led us-- and that led us to define this notion of neural networks, where we're
going to generalize our linear classifiers to no longer just have one weight matrix, but instead stack two weight
matrices on top of each other with a non-linearity in between them. And now this gives us a much more powerful mechanism
for predicting scores from our inputs. Now, basically the problem is still the same.
We have our input pixels going through this computation, spitting out scores. But now, rather than computing what we just basically selected
a different functional form for this score function. And this gave us-- and now the algebra is pretty simple.
You just need to go from f equals wx. You add an extra w2, add a little non-linearity in between.
So the algebra doesn't change very much. But in doing so, your classifiers get much, much more powerful than they were before.
But now things get a little bit complicated again because how does this play into optimization. We know that if we have a loss function,
if we have a model, then we want to find values of those weight matrix that cause the loss to go down.
And to do that, we need to compute gradients. We need to be able to compute gradients of the loss with respect to all the parameters of our model.
And that's this notion of a computational graph. So these computational graphs are basically a data structure
to organize the computation of a neural network, where each node in the graph is a little functional primitive like a matrix multiply or a ReLU
or some other something else like that. And then data flows forward in this graph from left to right, from our inputs
and our weights on the left, flowing through all these intermediate nodes in the graph to spit out the loss function on the right.
And then once we compute the loss, you traverse this loss-- this graph backwards from right to left to compute gradients of that loss with respect
to all the nodes of the graph inside the network. And this is now really cool, because it basically
means that we can write down these arbitrarily complicated neural networks, these arbitrarily complicated expressions for computing
our outputs from our inputs. But we now have an automate-- a nearly automated algorithm
for computing whatever gradients we want through arbitrarily complex neural networks. And the way that we do that is this magic of backpropagation.
And backpropagation is really cool. I think it's one of the algorithms that makes deep learning work, because it
takes this global problem of how do we compute the loss through this computational graph
and converts it into a local problem. And now each of these nodes doesn't need to know anything about the larger context of what
is the graph I'm living in, what is the problem I'm trying to solve. We just need to be able to define these little nodes
inside of our computational graph that on the forward pass know how to compute outputs from their inputs,
and then on the backwards pass can receive gradients coming upstream. It doesn't have to care where those gradients come from,
what was causing those gradients to happen. And I just need to compute gradients-- downstream gradients
with respect to my inputs given my upstream gradients. And again, this is so powerful because now it
gives us this mechanism where we can just define a bunch of different types of nodes that all just have follow this local API of computing outputs,
computing local gradients. And if we as long as we follow that API for all of the nodes, then we can start to stitch them together
into these big, complicated computational graphs that can do basically arbitrary computation.
And the gradients just come for free when we turn the crank on the back propagation algorithm.
And this slide that you guys saw last time is basically backpropagation on scalar values.
But we can generalize this to work on vector value-- on vector valued or matrix or tensor valued values as well.
But the basic thing to remember is that your inputs are some tensors, your outputs are some tensors.
And now your upstream gradient that you get is the gradient of the loss with respect to your outputs.
And that always has the same shape as your outputs. Because the loss is a scalar, a gradient
of loss with respect to a tensor says for each element in the tensor, if I were to wiggle that element a little bit, then how much does
the loss wiggle. And because the loss is a scalar, we just need to wiggle each of those-- we just need to imagine wiggling each element in our tensor
independently. And that is the definition of our gradient. So then that's very easy to remember. Your upstream gradients always have the exact same shape
as your outputs. Your downstream gradients, those are the gradients with respect to my inputs. Those also have the same shape as my inputs.
So then the backpropagation algorithm is basically just the chain rule, where I need to somehow compute my downstream gradients
as a function of my upstream gradients and whatever function I was trying to compute. And you'll get some practice on later assignments computing--
writing down the gradient expressions for different kinds of operators in your neural networks.
So basically, this gives us our recipe for solving pretty much any problem in deep learning.
This was intended to be quite a bit more general than just image classification or just linear classifiers or just fully connected networks.
Now, if you have any problem that you want to solve, you just need to encode it as tensors, write down some computational graph that computes your output
tensors from your input tensors, collect a data set of input-output tensors, write down a loss function for the kind of problem you want to solve.
And then optimize that loss function using gradient descent using backpropagation.
And that's a really powerful recipe that basically powers all deep learning applications, whether it's image classification, image
generation, large language models, pretty much anything involving a neural network is trained
using this formula or some slight variant on top of this formula. So that leads us to the second part
of the class, which is perceiving and understanding the visual world. So here's where we want to get a little bit more specialized
and start talking about not the general framework of deep learning, but how does this apply to problems that we want to solve in computer vision.
Processing images, doing interesting stuff with images. And today, we'll take a step towards that by talking about a bit more about convolutional networks.
So convolutional networks actually are a pretty small lift on top of this framework that we've already defined.
So we've already talked about two. We have this-- you have this general paradigm of computational graphs of little operators
that can live inside of our computational graphs. So we have this beautiful framework, but we actually haven't filled in a lot of the specifics
of that framework. We've actually only seen two or three different kinds of nodes that can live inside of our computational graphs.
We've seen fully connected layers which is basically a matrix multiply. We've seen activation functions like our ReLU,
and we've seen our loss functions themselves. And now to build up from what we've seen already
into convolutional networks, basically all we need to do is add a couple new types of nodes that can fit
into our computational graphs. And in particular, there's really only two operators that we need to talk about to build
much more powerful networks, which will be the convolution layer that we'll spend most of today's lecture talking about.
And then the pooling layer, which is another thing that we often use when processing images.
So that's the roadmap for today. I want to talk a little bit about convolutional networks in general.
Then we'll talk about these two particular computational primitives that we can use to build convolutional networks
in our computational graphs. So we've already talked about-- so then here we want to step back a little bit
and think about this problem of image classification again. So we've already talked about how image classification is this super core problem in computer vision, where
we want to take an input image and then predict from that input image what is in this image as a set of categories--
predict one of k category labels basically. And this image obviously is a cat. So we want to predict the cat classifier.
And most of-- and we basically solved this problem in some sense already by building linear classifiers
and by building fully connected multi-layer perceptron neural networks. But these networks are basically operating in pixel space.
Their inputs, remember we said the first way to-- the first step to solving a deep learning problem
is to formulate it in terms of input-output tensors. Well, in this case, our input tensors were the raw pixel values of our images.
So when we write f of x equals wx that x input, that's just the literal values of all of our pixels.
And then we go from those raw pixel values to our class scores. But there's another way to do it, which was common
back in the dark ages before neural networks came about and saved us from all this TDM. Maybe back in the early 2000, up until maybe 2010, 2011-ish,
was this idea of feature representations. So here, the idea is you can actually
choose what is going to be your input to your neural network. So you could have said, rather than feeding the raw pixel
values of the image into our neural network, instead we could define some other kind of function, which
is going to extract features, extract some-- convert those pixel values of our image into some other meaningful
representation that we as the intelligent human designers of this system, believe, represent,
or capture some of the important facets of our input image. So then when if you're doing image classification on top
of a feature representation, your step one would be to define a feature representation that converts your raw image pixels into this higher level
representation. And now that feature representation will now take the-- will now be the x that feeds
into your linear classifier. And there was a ton of work in computer vision,
really in the 2000 to the late 2010s or to the early 2010-ish that used this idea of feature representations for all kinds
of tasks. And I don't really think it's useful to go into super great detail on any of these particular feature
representations, because spoiler alert, they got deprecated like 10 years ago, but it's useful to have a flavor for what
they might have looked like. So one example of a feature representation that people sometimes used is this notion
of a color histogram. So here what we could say is divide the space. So maybe we think that somehow the distribution of colors
in our image might be a useful thing for a classifier to look at or care about. Because maybe you're building a fruit detector,
an apple detector, and you want to know if it's ripe or not. Maybe a red apple from a green apple, knowing how much red or green is in the image might be something
that we as humans think is useful for the network to know for making its classifications. So here we could build-- we could
try to build a feature representation that captures that intuition. So here what we might do is take the space of all possible colors, discretize that space
into some set of buckets. And now for every pixel in our image, we map that pixel to one of the discrete buckets in our color
space. And then basically, our feature representation becomes something like a count of how many pixels in the image
fall into this color bucket. And now you could-- and now this is an interesting representation because it destroys all the spatial structure of the image.
And it only talks about the color distributions. So now if you had red in the corner versus red on the other side, they would-- those two images
would look the same to this color histogram features, but they would look very different from the raw-- on the raw pixel perspective.
So the color histogram is a one basic of feature extractor or feature representation
that you can build on images that basically looks only at color and does not look at spatial structure at all.
Another category of feature representations that people used to look at is the dual to that in which
are these histogram of oriented gradients. And I don't think it's useful to talk too much about exactly how these are computed.
But the intuition of these is that they basically throw away the color information and they only look at the structure information.
They basically want to look for every point in the image what direction, what is the local direction
of the edges in the image around that local region. So here you can see that this frog, the leaves of the frog,
it extracts diagonal type of features because it corresponds to these diagonal structures over here
or around the frog's eyes, you can see it of captured those spherical-- those circular structures.
So again, it's not super useful to see how this is computed, but it's useful to know that these are the features that people would designed for images, maybe
a decade or decade and a half ago, and people combined these in all complicated ways.
So people would often-- you might wonder, oh, what's the best feature representation. The usual answer was just stack them all together.
So a pretty common approach would be to have a bunch of different feature representations, extract them all from your image,
and then concatenate them all into one big feature vector. And that's becomes your feature representation for your image.
And now you could imagine once we have this feature representation, we can basically stick whatever classifier
we want on top of it. And it's interesting to then take a step back and contrast
that picture, that viewpoint of that whole system. So system A is thinking about feature extractor plus learned
network or learned linear classifier on top of your features. And then system B is end-to-end neural networks.
And they actually don't look that different. If you take a step back and think about it in the right way,
both of these systems are ultimately inputting the raw pixels of the image and outputting some scores or predictions about the image.
The difference is that-- the difference which part of the system is designed by humans, versus which part is
learned via gradient descent. In the feature extraction plus linear classifier paradigm, the feature extraction portion of the system
is designed-- that could be a bunch of really hairy C code or hairy Matlab code, and you don't want to think about the details of what's
going on inside of that. And then just the part that you're learning via gradient descent, the part that you're learning from your training data,
is just that classifier on top of the feature extractor, whereas the neural network approach is basically
saying gradient descent is probably a better programmer than you, and lots of data probably knows more about your problem than you do.
So then the intuition of these neural network classifiers is they're still ultimately going to be a system that inputs the raw pixel
values and spits out your classification scores at the end. But the difference is that all parts of that system, from the raw pixels,
all the way to the final classification scores will be tuned via gradient descent and will be learned from your training data set.
So the intuition is that there might be-- in this feature extraction paradigm, there might be some bottlenecks.
You as a human might get something wrong. You might have wrong intuition about what parts of the problem are important, what things are not important
or it might be really hard for you to write down the perfect feature extractor that solves your problem, and this end-to-end learning approach of ConvNets,
and really of deep learning more generally, is just saying that data and compute can likely solve that problem better than you as a human designer can.
And this paradigm has basically won over the past decade and a half for lots and lots of problems
repeatedly. So that gives an intuition of-- so then
the question is like for the particular problem of images, how should we design these end-to-end systems.
It's not going to be a fully connected network all the way. That would be a little bit silly. We do need to still put a little bit of design into the system.
But the difference about designing a neural network versus designing a feature extractor is that in designing a neural network,
you're not designing a particular function of a feature extractor. You're defining a whole category of functions,
where the category of functions is defined by the structure of your computational graph, by the sequence of operators that get run.
But there's a little bit of-- there's some flexibility in that system because you're leaving the weights of the system free to be learned
from data. But the role of the human designer still matters. You still need to decide what is that architecture
of your network. What is that sequence of operators that get stitched into a computational graph, what are the sizes of all the matrices involved
at every stage of processing. So there still is a lot of role for the human to design parts of the problem in this deep learning era,
but what you're designing is a little bit different. So this is basically where we start
to see the deficiencies in the tools that we have so far for solving this problem. Because we see that-- we've seen linear layers,
we've seen fully connected networks. And the only neural network architecture that we've seen
is to flatten our pixels of our image into a big vector, do matrix multiply, do ReLU, do more matrix multiply,
do more ReLU. And that's about it. That's all we know how to do at this point. And one big problem with that is that it
destroys the spatial structure of the images. There's this big problem.
Images are actually not one dimensional objects. Images are two dimensional. They have two dimensional structure.
That two dimensional structure matters for the content of those images. And when you build a linear classifier on raw pixels
by stretching it out into a big vector, you're basically ignoring that important factor of your input
data in the design of your neural network architecture. So when we think about designing neural network architectures
for images, in particular, we want to think what are other-- what are other designs for our network, what
are other computational primitives we can slot into our computational graphs that better-- that better respect that two-dimensional structure
of images. And that leads us to convolutional networks. So convolutional networks are basically
a category of neural network architectures that are built of linear layers, nonlinearities, convolution
layers, pooling layers, sometimes a couple others that stitch together into these neural network architectures that input raw pixel values
and then output some prediction or scores for our images. And the general structure of these
is that usually they'll have some prefix, some body of the network which is some interleaved sequence
of convolution layers, pooling layers and non-linearities that can be thought of as extracting some useful feature
representation for the image. And then on top of that, they'll usually be some fully connected layers, sometimes as few as one,
but sometimes more than one, which you can think of as a multi-layer perceptron fully connected network classifier that lives on top of
and ingests the features from the convolutional portion of the network. But crucially, this whole system is tuned end
to end via gradient descent by minimizing the loss on your training data set.
And these networks actually have quite a bit of long history. So this image, this particular ConvNet architecture
that we've drawn on the screen actually comes from a paper back in 1998 with Yann LeCun, Leon Bottou
and others who were at the time building these convolutional neural networks all the way back in 1998 to perform the task of digit classification.
And it actually worked pretty well, but it was really expensive. They didn't have GPUs, they didn't have TPUs,
they didn't have the compute resources that we did today. But the underlying algorithm, the underlying network
architecture, basically looks pretty similar in 1998 to what things were-- to the architectures that people were using well into the 2010s.
And then zooming forward from 1998 up until 2012, that's when the AlexNet architecture came out.
And this was a big boom, like giant explosion of deep learning, especially in computer vision.
And I think we talked about this in some earlier lectures. But the AlexNet architecture, again doesn't look that different from this Yann LeCun,
LeNet architecture from 1988. It's a bunch of convolutional layers, fully connected layers. It's bigger, there's more layers.
The layers have more units in them, but it's still trained end to end with backpropagation to minimize some fairly simple loss functions.
But here, like AlexNet, was when really things started to take off. And at this time, they were able to train on GPUs.
GPUs were available. There was more data available because of internet, because of ImageNet.
So AlexNet is when things really started to take off. So then the era from, I think, about 2012 to around 2020-ish
was an era where convolutional networks were basically dominating almost every problem in computer vision.
They were solved basically anything you-- any a problem that you wanted to do with an image in that era, it was almost certainly going to be a ConvNet that had the best
performance on that problem. So this included tasks like detection on the left, which is the task of not just classifying
an image, but drawing a box around all the objects in the image and putting a category label on the box.
Segmentation is the task of assigning labels not at the box level or the image level, but instead assigning labels at the pixel level.
So now we want to assign a category label to every pixel independently in our image. And we'll talk more about architectures for these problems
in future lectures. But these can be solved very effectively using convolutional networks.
People used ConvNets for other problems involving language as well. So the task of image captioning, where
we want to predict a natural language caption from an image. Some of the first widely successful approaches
to this problem also were built on convolutional networks. And then even for some more recent tasks
of generative modeling. So text to image-- sorry, captioning is basically the problem of image to text,
where we input an image and then want to output a natural language sentence describing the image.
We can also think about the inverse problem of text to image generation, where we want to input a natural language
description of something that we're imagining in our head, and have the system generate a new image from scratch that
hopefully matches our input description and some of the really-- some of the first really widely successful--
widely successful versions of this problem also were built on convolutional networks. So this particular figure is from the Stable Diffusion paper
that came out back in 2021. And this has got-- this technology has gotten a lot better in the last couple of years.
And we'll talk more about that in some later lectures. But it's useful to point out that this basically-- the first versions of this that started to work really well
were also built on convolutional networks. So basically, convolutional networks were so important for this history of computer vision
that the initial version of this class that we started way back in 2015 was actually called convolutional neural networks for visual recognition,
because at the time, convolutional networks was basically synonymous with computer vision. And computer vision was basically
the biggest field that was benefiting from deep learning at that time. So in setting out to teach a class about deep learning,
it actually made a lot of sense to focus entirely on the problem of convolutional networks for image problems. And that's basically the inception
of this class 10 years ago. But the field has actually evolved a lot since then.
Convolutional networks have actually gotten replaced. Visual recognition, there's a lot of other interesting problems that we can solve now.
So you'll notice that the name of the class changed at some point along the way and to no longer focus so specifically on neural--
convolutional networks. And the reason for that is that I said this was the era from 2012 to 2020.
You might be wondering what happened in 2020 other than COVID that could have displaced convolutional networks.
It wasn't COVID, it was transformers. So transformers are this alternate neural network architecture that we'll talk about in a couple more lectures.
But basically, they started off in natural language processing for processing documents, for processing text strings.
And the transformer architecture got first published in 2017. And for a couple of years after that, it mainly stayed in the regime of processing text,
but there was a really important paper in 2021 that basically applied nearly the exact same transformer
architecture that had been getting used to process text, to process strings, and instead used it to process images in nearly the exact same way.
And since then, people have found that for a lot of the previous problems that we just talked about that were previously
solved using convolutional networks, you could replace the CNN with a transformer, keep everything else the same and the problem--
and you tend to get better performance on these problems. They scale up to more data, they scale up to more compute.
And this is-- we can get more data, we can get more compute. So these are much more commonly used for more and more computer
vision problems these days. And we'll talk much more about transformers in lecture 8, but I thought it would be weird to be pitching ConvNets
super hard when actually they don't get used quite as much nowadays as they did maybe five years ago.
But I still think it's really useful to talk about convolutional networks one, because there is a lot of historical significance, two,
these algorithms still do get used quite a lot in practice. Three, it helps you build intuitions about what's
important for images and four, they're actually not completely dead. A lot of times we're actually building hybrid systems.
Sometimes we use convolution, sometimes we use transformers, sometimes we mix them together in various ways. So it's actually super useful to still know about this stuff.
So then basically, the rest of today we're going to talk more about convolutional networks. We said that-- we said that a convolutional network is just
a computational graph for processing images. That's built from a couple of different primitives. We've already met the fully connected layer
and the activation function. So we basically need to walk through these two more layers of the convolution layer and the pooling layer.
Quick recap of the fully connected layer. This is what we've already talked about in the context of linear classifiers.
So with our fully connected layer, like we said, basically what we do is we take our pixels of our image. Our image is this three dimensional tensor 32 by 32
by 3, 32 by 32 are these two spatial dimensions. Three, are three channel dimensions for your RGB colors.
So we take that 32 by 32 by 3 vector. You stretch it out into a long vector of 3072,
because that's if you multiply those in your head, that's the number you get. And then you have this basically this vector of 3072 numbers.
We have a weight matrix that's 3072 by 10, in this case, because 10 is the number of output classes that we want.
You do a matrix vector, multiply between those two. You end up with a vector of 10 numbers giving us our class score.
And in particular, it's interested-- in trying to generalize this from fully connected layers to convolutional layers, it's useful to think a little bit
more about the structure of what this fully connected layer is doing that fully connected layer, the output vector,
contains 10 elements, each one of those elements is a single number. Each one of those numbers is predicted
by computing an inner product between one of the rows of your weight matrix and the entire input vector.
But each entry you should basically think of as a dot product and a dot product you should basically think about it as a template match.
Because the dot product between two vectors is high when the two vectors point the same way, and it's 0 when the two vectors are orthogonal.
So anything built on dot products is basically a template matching. So the way that you should think about these fully connected
layers is that we have a set of templates, each of the templates has the same size as our input.
And then the output is the template matching score between each one of our templates and the entire input.
So then once we think about it that way, there's actually a nice way we can generalize this from fully connected layers into convolutional layers.
And that's by saying we're still going to have this notion of template matching. We're still going to have this notion
of learning a bank of filters. But what we're going to change is that those filters will-- those templates are no longer going
to have the same shape as the input. Instead, now our now our filters will have
a-- will only look at a small subset of the input. So more concretely, rather than stretching out our image
into a big vector of 3072 numbers, instead, we're going to maintain the 3D spatial structure of our image.
It's going to now be a three-dimensional tensor of three channels, sometimes called depth or channels
dimension, 32 width, 32 height. And now one of our filters is going to be a tiny little sub-image a tiny low resolution image,
in this case a 5 by 5 pixel image. And importantly, that small filter
needs to have three channels. The channels are always going to span the same as the number of channels in the input,
but the spatial size will be smaller. And now what we're going to do is we're going to compute dot products.
We think about that small filter as a little chunk of image template. And we're going to slide it everywhere across the image
and say for every point in the image, how much does that sub partial-- sub part of the image match this template
that we're learning in our convolutional filter. So we'll plop that convolutional filter down at some chunk of the image.
That 5 by 5 by 3 filter will line up with some 5 by 5 by 3 chunk of the image at that spatial location will compute
an inner product between those two, and that will give us one single scalar number, telling us how much does that chunk of the image align
with our template. And now we'll repeat that process and slide that template everywhere in our image.
And every place that we plop down that template, it'll give us-- we'll again compute this template matching score that says, how much does that piece of the image align
with that one template. And as we slide that filter everywhere on the input image,
we're going to collect all of those scores, all of those template matching scores into a plane. And that plane will now be a two dimensional--
a two-dimensional plane that says basically for every point-- in every point in the plane now
corresponds to how much did that corresponding piece of the input image align with our filter.
But of course, this is deep learning. We want a lot of compute. And how do we get more compute? We have more filters.
So now we'll add a second filter and we'll say rather-- we'll repeat the whole process again
with another filter. So we'll have-- we're going to go-- we have a 5 by 5 by 3 filter that we colored in blue.
Now let's imagine a second filter that's now colored in green. Our second filter will still be 5 by 5 by 3.
And we'll repeat the exact same procedure of sliding that green filter everywhere on the image, compute template matching scores between the green filter
and little sub pieces of the image, and then collect all of those scores in a second plane,
telling us for every point in the image, how much did it respond to the green filter.
And now we can basically iterate this and add as many filters as we want. So then in this case, we are drawing
six filters, each of them is going to be 3 by 5 by 5 or 3 by-- 3 by 5 by 5.
So then we can actually collect all of those filters into a single four-dimensional tensor. So that four-dimensional tensor now has 6
is a leading dimension because we have six filters. And then that 3 by 5 by 5 is that image template is
that chunk, is that template that we're learning. And now the convolution layer basically takes as input
our three-dimensional input-- our three-dimensional image and our four-dimensional bank of filters, slides, the slides, all
the filters everywhere on the image and gives us these response planes. So then once we collect all those response planes
and stack them up in a third dimension, then our output has size 6 by 28 by 28, where 28 by 28
should be interpreted as spatial dimensions, and that 6 is a channel dimension. And of course, we'll also--
just as we do with linear layers, we'll often add a learnable bias vector as well to our convolutional layers, so that then in that sense, it's--
in a linear layer, a bias is one scalar per row in the linear layer.
Correspondingly, in a convolutional layer, we'll have typically one scalar bias value for every filter in our convolutional-- for every one
of our convolutional filters. So that means that we'll have a six dimensional bias vector in this setting.
Yeah, the question was clarifying 3 is the RGB channels. Yeah, that's correct. Question is how do you get the filters.
That's the miracle of gradient descent and backpropagation. So the idea is that we're defining this operator.
This operator is going to have an input image and a set of filters. But no human is going to define what
those filters are going to be. Instead, we're going to initialize those filters randomly. And then they will be learned via gradient descent on whatever
problem you're trying to solve. So that's actually a really important thing to keep in mind. And that gives these layers their power
is that we're defining this fairly computationally expensive layer, but we're expecting that it'll be filled in with the data from-- with the data
and compute from our training. Question is, how do you set the five. That's a hyperparameter. So we talked about hyperparameters
and cross-validation a couple of lectures ago. So these would be architectural hyperparameters that you would typically set via cross-validation in some way.
Yeah, good question. Does it make sense to have different sizes of filters? So as we'll see in the CNN architectures lecture
next lecture-- actually I think you're going to talk about inception. Sometimes you actually do have that.
But that typically happens at the-- there's kind of a nice API design problem
when you're designing what is a primitive in your computational graph versus what is going to be an emergent structure built out
of primitives. So in this case, we usually define a single convolutional layer as having a fixed filter size,
because that makes it easier to compute and write efficient GPU kernels. But if you can effectively have multiple multiply size filters
by stitching together a computational graph that combines convolution layers with different filter sizes
in a larger network structure. So it's yes and no is the answer to your question. The question is, what are we learning.
And this is very important to distinguish between a parameter versus a hyperparameter. So a hyperparameter is something that we set before we
start training the network. So in this case, one of the hyperparameters would be the number of filters and the size of those filters.
Because those set the shapes of our tensor. So then in a parameter is a value
that we're going to set and optimize over the course of gradient descent. So in this case, the number of filters, the number of output
channels, the size of those filters, those will be hyperparameters. We set those once before we start training. At the beginning of training, we'll randomly
initialize the filters and then the value and-- that will give us a fixed shape-- fixed size tensor.
And then the values inside of that tensor will float around and change over the course of optimization. So that's the-- so then those are
parameters because they get set via gradient-- via gradient descent. Yes, the question is what gradient are we computing.
Whenever you do backpropagation you're always computing gradient of the loss with respect to things inside the network.
So in this case, we'll be computing gradient of the loss with respect to the individual scalar-- with respect
to our convolutional filter weights. So that's basically saying what is a gradient that's saying for every individual scalar
inside of every one of our filters, if we wiggle that scalar a little bit, then how much is the loss going to change.
So then the gradient of the loss with respect-- we're always computing gradient of the loss with respect to our convolutional filters.
The question is basically like, what do we do with the bias. So basically, the bias would be added to each of our inner products.
So then we'll always compute like inner product of one of our filters against a chunk of the image and then add the corresponding scalar from the bias.
The bias is a vector, but the number of entries in the vector is equal to the number of filters. So then each entry in the bias gets basically broadcast
across the entire spatial dimension in the output. But each bias only gets used for--
one bias gets used for one filter. So conceptually you basically one filter you slide everywhere.
That gives us a two-dimensional plane of activations. And then if you have a second filter, you get a second plane of activations.
Those are independent operators. Like step one slide first filter everywhere. Step two slide the second filter everywhere.
Every filter gives rise to a plane, a plane that we call an activation map.
And then we stack all of those up. And that's the operation of the convolution layer. The question is yeah, basically after every gradient descent--
every time we do gradient descent, it's going to change the filters. So whenever you imagine a training a neural network,
it's always this loop of like while true, get a batch of data, send your data through the network,
forward pass, compute loss, backward pass, compute gradient with respect to loss and now make a gradient step using your optimizer.
So then it's always going to be data, forward, loss, backward step. And then every time you do a step,
it's going to make a change to the filters. All right. So I swung the other way I said more questions
I got too many questions. But that's good. We'll equalize in here. So then we talked about the convolution layer.
It's actually pretty common in the convolution layer to work on it in a batch mode. So rather than working on one input image,
we'll actually work on a batch of input images. So this is nice because it makes everything four dimensional.
Now we have a four-dimensional tensor of inputs, which is a set of input images. We have a four-dimensional tensor
of filters which is a set of filters, each of which is a three dimensional chunk of an image. And then the output is a four dimensional--
is a four-dimensional tensor, which is a set of outputs. Each output one output per image, each image
is output is a three-dimensional tensor, giving a stack of feature planes. You have to start to think in lots of dimensions
when you start to build neural networks, and that's actually fun. So then here's the general formulation
of a convolution layer. Is that in general, you're going to take as input a four-dimensional tensor of n by cn by h
by w, which is a set of n images. Each of those n images has seen cn channels.
For the case of an RGB image, that'll be 3, but we might in general have more than three channels.
This could be arbitrary. And then h and w is the spatial size of our input images. Our convolutional filters will be a four dimensional tensor
of shape c out by cn by kw by kh. C out is the number of filters, the number of output channels,
cn is-- and then the rest of that are three dimensional filters. So it's a set of three-dimensional filters.
Each three dimensional filter has shape cn by kw by kh. That's the kernel width and kernel height.
And then we have c out such filters that get collected into a four-dimensional tensor. And then as output, we're going to produce a four dimensional
tensor again, where the shape is n for the number of images one output per image, c out-- each of those outputs
is going to consist of c out feature planes one per filter. And then each of those planes is going to be h prime by w prime.
And this is the general formulation of a conv layer. And then a convolutional network is just
a network that is just a computational graph that includes a bunch of conv layers. So in practice, we'll tend to stack up
a bunch of convolutional operators one after another. And in stacking a bunch of convolutional operators,
that will be a convolutional network. So this is a simple ConvNet. You start with an image that's 3 by 32 by 32,
then we have a conv layer that has six filters. Each filter is 5 by 5 by 3. Then after we do the first convolution, that gives us
a new three dimensional set of activations for that one image, where we have six channels that matches the six filters, 28
by 28, because the spatial size changed a little bit through the convolution, then we have another convolution that
now has 10 filters, each of which is 5 by 5 by 6. So the 10 is going to give us the output--
the output dimensions and the next layer of convolution. And this 6 is going to be the number of channels
that needs to match up the channel dimension here of the input to the convolution. So you can see you can just stack
a bunch of these convolution layers and perform a lot of computation. But there's actually a problem in exactly this network
architecture design. And can anybody spot it? That's sizing. That's a problem, not the one I had in mind.
Evolutions are local. That's another good problem, not the one I had in mind. Actually, those two will be able to fix pretty easily in a couple
slides, but I had a different problem in mind. A lot of memory that is a problem, but not one we can fix. You just got to buy a bigger GPU.
Number of filters increases. I don't think that's a problem necessarily. That's OK. Everything's linear.
Yes, that is a problem. So we said that convolution was dot products. Dot product is a linear operator.
Composition of two linear operators is still a linear operator. So that means that if we have two convolution layers stacked
directly on top of each other, they actually have the same representational power as a single convolution layer, because of the linearity of the operator.
There's actually a very simple fix to that. Add an activation function. Exactly. So it's the same-- actually the same bug
that we saw in multi-layer neural networks and the same fix. We need to add a nonlinear activation function in between our convolutional layers
if we want-- this introduces non-linearity to the problem, non-linearity to the network architecture,
and increases the representational power of the network that we're learning. So in general, ConvNets are going
to be some stack of convolution layers, nonlinearities and other kinds of layers in our computational graph.
There was a question earlier about what do the convolutional filters learn. This is basically-- we can view this
by analogy with what we already did in linear classifiers. So in linear classifiers, we have this intuition
where each row could be visualized-- each row of the learned weight matrix could be thought of as a template that
has the same shape as the whole input image. Now, with a convolutional filter, you can think of it the same way, but now each filter,
rather than extending over the entire spatial size of the input image, is going to be just a small sub piece, a sub chunk of an image.
So we can actually visualize the first-- we can actually visualize the first layer convolution filters
of a trained neural network. So these are the first layer convolution filters that are learned by an AlexNet architecture that
was trained for image classification on ImageNet. And here each of these are basically little chunks of RGB images.
These are the little templates that get slid around the input image in the first layer of the AlexNet architecture.
And the fact that this was AlexNet, the fact that this was trained on ImageNet, the fact that this was classification, it turns out just
about all convolutional networks end up learning filters that look something like this on almost all problems and almost all data sets
and tasks, as long as they're reasonable tasks. And the thing we see is that we often learn
two kinds of filters in here. One tends to be looking for colors, especially opposing colors.
So you'll see this one is looking for a contrast between green and red. We also see colored blobs like pink and green blobs.
And the other category of filter we tend to see are looking for somehow the spatial structure of the images.
So like this one is looking for a vertical edge, a horizontal edge. This one is looking for a vertical edge, some of these
are looking for diagonal edges. So they tend to look for colors and edges. And in these little local neighborhoods
of our input images. So we can play this trick on the first layer of the convolutional filter and just visualize them directly
as images. It gets a little bit trickier to visualize the higher layers in the network. And I'm not going to explain this figure.
I'm just going to present it without too much explanation. But higher layers of the network tend to learn larger spatial structures of our input image.
Here, the visualization is like each row represents a filter in a learned network, and each column
represents some piece of an input image that filter was responding strongly to.
So the visualization here is a bit different than the previous slide. So these are all basically chunks of input images
that a filter was responding to. And here you can see that this six layer convolution one of these filters feels like it's responding maybe to eyes.
This one looks like maybe it's responding to pieces of text. This one looks like maybe it's responding to wheels or circles
or top halves of circles. Something like that. And again, this all gets driven via gradient descent
via training on your large scale data sets via gradient descent. Nobody's sitting down and designing these filters by hand.
And like I said, visualizing these higher layer filters is a bit tricky and more involved. Question was if you look at all the responses to the filters,
can you reconstruct the original image? Actually, it turns out you can do that. And the trick and the way that you do that
is also gradient descent. Gradient descent is really powerful. And that's something that we'll talk about, I think, in a couple
more lectures on some mechanisms that do that. Oh, that's a good question. How do the filters get differentiated.
That actually comes down to the random initialization. So then it's really important that the way you initialize your filters is random.
And crucially, that you have a different initialization for each filter when you start training your network,
because that's going to break the symmetry between the filters. Because if all the filters are exactly the same, the loss is the same, then that gradient
is going to broadcast back and be the same on all the filters. So if you initialize them the same, they will stay the same. But if you initialize them to be different,
then you'll break the symmetry and they can learn different features. Yeah. Basically, the human designer of the network
needs to write down what is the sequence of operators and the sequence of channels. And that's the question of neural network architecture
design that we'll talk a little bit more about in the next lecture. Third question is, why is it the deeper layers
visualize larger structures that actually has a bit to do with the receptive fields that we have a slide on in a little bit.
So maybe we'll get there. And I think a couple-- some of these questions will get answered. So one thing that already came up
is how do we look at the spatial dimensions of these convolutions. So I wanted to take a look-- a closer
look at exactly how we compute the spatial dimensions of convolutions. So in this case here, we've taken
this picture of-- this picture of a convolution. We're rotating it 90 degrees and dropping the channel dimension.
So now the channel dimension is going into the board. And then we have our 7 by 7 spatial dimensions. So here we're looking at an input
that's 7 by 7 in spatial size. And we have a 3 by 3 conv kernel. And then the question is, how big is our output going to be here?
Well, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. So our output is going to be 5 by 5
because we can slide that filter and plop it down in 5 different spaces. And then we can generalize it.
If our input has length w, our conv filter has length k, then our output is going to be w minus k plus 1.
And you can sit down and convince yourself that that's the right formula. But there's a problem that actually a couple of people
already pointed out is that your feature maps are going to shrink in spatial size as you go through this convolution.
And that's annoying. It's actually-- like you could actually work with that. And there are some neural network architectures
that deal with that. But sometimes we're lazy and we just want to keep the same size for everything, because that's just
basically simpler for human designers to think about. And one trick that we do there is something called padding.
So here it's common to add additional data, like virtual data around the input--
around your true input data, that you're going to basically add extra zeros around
before you compute the convolution operator. And now this basically lets us solve this shrinking feature map
problem. Because now if we have-- add padding of p, in this case, we have padding p equals 1.
So we're adding one pixel of zeros all around everywhere, then we basically add 2p to our output size.
So in particular, if you have a 3-- if you have a 3 by 3 conv and you add padding of 1, then your feature map
is going to stay the same size. And that's convenient. Now, if you've taken signal processing there actually are some problems here.
This can lead to weird weirdness from a signal processing perspective, but we'll ignore that and we'll just look at the sizes and shapes of the tensors
because that's a little bit easier to comprehend. But be aware like why are we putting zeros. Is that going to cause problems?
Yes, it is going to cause problems on the borders, but it seems to be in a lot of cases.
OK. Yeah. So then like I said, a pretty common setting is to set p is to have actually k be an odd number
and then have p be k minus 1 over 2 because that's going to mean that your spatial size
after convolution is the same as the spatial size before the convolution. Then the next interesting thing to think about
is this notion of receptive fields. Someone was asking a little bit over here why do the deeper layers learn larger structures.
That's actually inherent in the way that convolutions are built. So in thinking about a single convolution,
each output is looking at this local region of an input. So by design, the output of one convolution at the first layer
can only be looking at a piece of the image, which is the same size as the convolutional kernel that you're learning.
But if we build a ConvNet that's stacking multiple convolutions on top of each other, then these receptive fields
get magnified through the network. So then in this case, we're looking at a network
with three convolution layers. And we see that in the final layer of activations.
Each entry here depends on a local region in the layer before it.
But each one of those entries depends in turn on a local region in the layer before it, which depends in turn on a local region in the layer before it.
So when you have these convolutions, even though each individual convolution is looking at a local neighborhood in the layer
before it, as you stack up convolutions in a bunch of layers, then the effective size of the original input that each of those convolutions
is looking at grows over the course of the network. And in particular this--
we call the effective receptive field. So the effective receptive field of a convolution is basically how many pixels in the original image
had the opportunity to influence one activation of the network later on downstream.
And you'll notice that the convolution actually-- this effective receptive field basically grows linearly with the number of convolution layers.
And there's a potential problem here is because ultimately when we make classification decisions at the end of our network,
we would like our classification decisions to basically aggregate global information across the entire image.
But you need a lot of conv layers to do it. So a trick there is basically to add some way
to increase effective receptive fields more quickly. One way that we can do this in convolution
is by introducing something called a stride. So here what we're saying is that rather than placing the filter everywhere in the image,
we're going to skip some. So we're going to instead of moving the field-- moving the receptive field with one,
we're going to stride it by 2 instead. So now in this case, we go back to our 7 by 7 input, 3 by 3 conv
do a stride 2. Now, what's the output size. 1, 2, 3. 3 by 3.
And then in general, if we have our input w filter size k padding of p stride
s, then we get this ugly formula for the size of the output w minus k.
The bigger kernels shrink the input plus 2P padding adds back some of the missing size divided by the stride.
The stride, divides the input shape and then plus 1 because that's how-- because of some fence post math.
OK, so then the strided convolutions are interesting because if you go back to this picture, now when we do a strided convolution,
it's effectively downsampling the image inside the neural network. So then when we have strided convolution,
then each conv layer is effectively like dividing the shape of the feature map, usually by 2.
And then when we stack these, that means that now you can get exponential growth in the effective receptive field. So if you stack a bunch of conv layers in each
of those conv layers is actually downsampling by a factor of 2, then if you run through a similar exercise, you'll see that the effective receptive field is now
growing exponentially in the depth of the network. So that means that with relatively few layers, we can build up a very large, effective receptive field that
looks at the entire input image. So here, let's work through just one example
to make sure that we all are on the same page about convolution. So here, let's think about an input volume 3 by 32 by 32.
Let's think about a convolution layer with 10 filters, each of those filters is 5 by 5 with stride 1 pad two.
What's the size of the output? I color coded it because there's a lot of numbers here to keep track of.
So here, it's 10 by 32 by 32. This 32 is actually a different 32 than this 32.
So that's why they're different colors of blue. But this 10 is the number of output channels. Output channels has to match the number of filters.
And the spatial size is computed using that formula that we just saw. So then the input spatial size comes down here plus 2--
plus the padding comes down here. Padding adds the spatial size, 5 is the convolutional kernel that
divides the spatial size, stride of 1. So that's trivial and then add one. And this just so happens to come out to 32.
So in this case, this follows the same pattern that we talked about a couple slides ago where it's an odd shaped convolutional kernel.
In this case five. The padding is two. So if the kernel size is 2k plus 1,
then padding of k means we maintain the same spatial size. Number of learnable parameters here.
Maybe I'll just go through these because we have a couple more slides to get through. So here in this case, the number of learnable parameters
is 760 because we have each filter is basically a 3 by 5 by 5.
And we have one for the bias. So we have 76 learnable parameters per filter. We have 10 filters.
So it's 760 multiple-- 760 learnable parameters here. We can also compute the number of multiply add operations.
How much compute does this convolution kernel, how much compute does this convolution operator take. So here it's a lot.
Well, is it a lot? I don't know. I don't have a lot-- you may or may not have a lot of intuition for what is a lot of computation.
But in this case, the way that I think about computing, how many flops, how much compute does a convolution operator
take, we think about what the output volume size is 10 by 32 by 32. And we know that each entry in that output volume
was computed via dot product, a dot product in particular between one of our filters and a chunk of our input.
So in this case, we know the total flops because we know the number of outputs is 10 by 32 by 32, which is about 10,000.
And then each of those outputs is computed via dot product of a 3 by 5 by 5 filter and a 3 by 5
by 5 chunk of the image. So that's 75 elements. So multiplying those together means it takes about 768,000
floating point multiply add operations. OK, so then here's the one line--
one slide summary of convolution. I'm not going to walk through this. This is more for you to look at later.
But this just summarizes all the hyperparameters and the formulas associated with convolution layers.
If you look in PyTorch, PyTorch is the deep learning framework that a lot of people use.
You'll see this convolution layer has all these hyperparameters that we talked about. There's a couple other interesting hyperparameters
that we didn't talk about called groups and dilation. Dilation isn't really used so much anymore. Groups still get used sometimes.
But maybe we'll talk about those in a later lecture. You can have other kind of other kinds of convolutions too.
So we talked about 2D convolution. We can also do 1D convolution, where rather than having a two-dimensional signal that we slide a filter over,
we now have a one dimensional signal that we slide a filter over in with one degree of freedom, or a three-dimensional convolution,
where we have a three-dimensional signal, a three-dimensional filter, and now you can slide that filter everywhere in 3D space to convolve with the input signal.
So this idea of a convolution really extends beyond just two dimensional two dimensional images.
OK. That's basically all about convolution. And the last one is pooling.
Thankfully, pooling is pretty simple. So pooling layers are basically another way to downsample inside
of your neural network. So we saw that strided convolution is one way that we can downsample inside of a neural network.
And downsampling is useful because it lets us build up receptive fields more quickly as we go through the depth of the network.
But convolution actually still costs quite a lot of computation. So convolution is where most of the flops, most of the compute
happens in a convolutional network. And pooling layers are basically a way to downsample that's very, very cheap.
That doesn't cost a lot of compute. And the idea in a pooling layer is given our three-dimensional tensor, where in this case 64
by 112 by 112. You should think about that as a spatial-- like a three-dimensional volume of features
where the spatial size is 112 by 112, and we have 64 planes, 64 channels of activation.
So now what we're going to-- and each one of those planes is a 112 by 112 image. But then what we're going to do is
take each one of those individual feature planes, pull it out from our input tensor and downsample them independently, and then restack
them to compute the output. So then this input 64 by 224 by 224, we're going to pull out each of those 224 by 224 planes,
independently downsample it and then restack them to give a same number of channels, but change in the spatial size.
What is the method we use for downsampling? Great question. So the way-- that's actually hyperparameter
there's a couple different mechanisms of downsampling that we use. One of the common ones-- one of the most common ones to use
is actually max-- is called max pooling. So in Max pooling what we're going to do is take our single depth slice,
divide it up into non-overlapping regions. In this case, these are two-- and we often use-- and we use the same terminology
to talk about these as we do with convolution. So this way this we could say it's a kernel size 2 by 2 with stride of two
because that then that divides our inputs into these non-overlapping 2 by 2 tiles. Then within each of those non-overlapping 2 by 2 tiles,
we'll take the max entry. In this case, it's a 6, 8, 3, 4. So then you take the max entry inside each of those
and then that-- and then that gives us our spatial compression. And there's a whole-- you can imagine a whole set
of hyperparameters here. You could say, what is the kernel size. You could change the kernel size. You can change the stride.
You can also change the function that we use for downsampling. Max pooling is pretty common. You'll also see average.
You'll also see anti-aliased down pooling sometimes. So these are all just ways that you can downsample these feature
maps one at a time. Good question. Do we make a use of padding. Typically you do not use padding inside of pooling layers.
There's nothing mathematically preventing you from doing so. But in the case of max pooling, it would be silly.
It's basically equivalent to a ReLU. And so whenever you're using max pooling, if you're also using a ReLU that would be redundant.
So typically, we don't use padding in pooling layers. I'm actually not sure if PyTorch has a flag for pooling-- for padding or not in pooling layers.
Yeah. So the stride would be another one of these architectural hyperparameters. But usually don't tune these things too much.
Usually, the intuition behind pooling layer-- like honestly the most common is I want to downsample my I want to downsample everything
by a factor of 2 is by far the most common operation. So then the most common thing to do would be 2 by 2 stride 2.
Sometimes you'll do like 4 by 4 stride 2. But basically, the most common settings by far
is I want to downsample my everything by a factor of exactly two. Oh, that's a very good question.
Do images all have to be the same input size. In all the language that we're talking about so far, yes.
You're going to run into big problems if your input images are not the same size. So then things that you'll typically
do to fix that would be one, you either resize all your images to the exact same size before you batch
them to feed to the network. Sometimes you'll also pad your images out with zeros or some other value to make
them all the same signs but now padded rather than warped. Or you need to basically run these layers independently for images of different aspect ratios.
So that's another thing that you'll do sometimes in more sophisticated training setups, is that sometimes you'll do what's known as aspect ratio
bucketing. So then from your training data, you'll bucket them into different aspect ratios. And then each forward or backward
pass the network will be on a batch of images of the same resolution and aspect ratio. But then each iteration, you might grab images
with different resolutions or aspect ratios, or that's something that you'll see in some of the more common, larger production systems.
Yeah. So the question is, where do you put these. These are usually interspersed with the convolution layers. So a pretty common architecture--
a pretty common pattern for ConvNets is to intersperse the convolution and pooling. So for example, you'll see com com pool,
com com pool, com com pool fully connected, fully connected is a prototypical convolutional network.
Yeah, that's an excellent question. Does this introduce non-linearity. So it depends on the type of pooling operation
that you're using. So if you're doing max pooling that's a non-linearity. So in some networks, if you have a max pooling,
you may not use a ReLU around that convolution because a max pooling is a non-linearity itself.
If it's an average pooling that's also a linear operator. So then if you do average pooling it's linear. So then you probably still would want a ReLU there.
OK. So then here's my quick one-slide summary of pooling is basically the same hyperparameters as convolution.
Except you've got this extra pooling function, which is what is the mechanism you're using to do the downsampling.
Then the last thing I wanted to mention is this notion of translation equivariance.
What the hell is that? So I said at the beginning of the-- beginning of the lecture that we wanted operators that are
respecting the spatial structure of our images. And that we had this notion that flattening our images into big vectors is somehow not respecting the spatial structure
of our images. So there's a really interesting property that is shared by both convolution and pooling, which is one way to formalize this
notion of them respecting the 2D spatial structure of the images. And that's this notion of translation equivariance.
So it sounds like-- it sounds pretty crazy, but the idea is we can imagine two different operators, two
different branches. Along one branch, we can imagine taking our image, doing a convolution or pooling operator
to get an updated image, and then translating the result by shifting that feature map to the side by, for example.
Then you could imagine changing the order of these two things instead. What we could have done instead is first translate the image
and then do our convolution or pool operator on top of the translated image. And it just so happens that in this case,
the order doesn't matter if you translate and then convolution, you get the same result as if you had done convolution
and then translate subject to some boundary conditions, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. But like in the limit of infinitely large images
and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, ignoring some of these technical conditions, it's really interesting that you can actually
swap the order of translation in space versus performing these downsampling or convolution operators.
And that bakes in an important intuition about images, which is that when we're processing images,
the features that we extract from an image should only depend on the content of the image and should not depend on where in the image that-- where
the absolute location in the image that content came from. So that means that if I'm looking this way,
it looks like people-- it looks like people and benches. If I'm looking this way, it looks like people in benches.
And the fact that it's over here on my right and the fact that it's over here on my left, I want to process that data in the exact same way.
And that's an important intuition, an important structure that we want to of images and of the 2D
data that we're processing. And this notion of translation, equivariance basically is a way to mathematically describe
how that structure is baked into these operators. So this is interesting that it's a way
that we can build in our intuition about how images ought to be processed through the design of our operators,
not through the design of our feature extraction methods, as we saw at the beginning. The question is, why do you do your translation.
You. Don't This is not something you're actually going to do. This is basically a mathematical curiosity.
To be clear that you should not generally do this inside of your neural networks. This is basically like it's interesting to note that this
happens to be true, but you would not do this inside of your neural networks. And if you're a mathematician, you
call this a commutative diagram. And mathematicians love those things. So that's basically the summary of today.
We talked about convolutional networks. We talked about why they're interesting. We talked about these two new operators
of convolution and pooling. And then next lecture, we'll see how to stitch those together into CNN architectures.
And see you next time for that.

Hi, everyone. My name is Zain. I realized I actually didn't introduce myself on the first lecture I gave, which was lecture three,
but I'm one of the co-instructors for the course. My name is Zain Durante. I'm co-advised by Ehsan and Fei-Fei. I'm a fourth year PhD student at Stanford and in this lecture
today, lecture six, we'll be talking about training convolutional neural networks and also CNN architectures.
So I would say this lecture is really broken up into two different components.
The first one is just telling you how to piece together all of the different building blocks that we've learned like convolutional layers,
linear layers or fully connected layers together to create a CNN architecture. We'll go through some examples and then
also we'll talk about how you actually train these and all the steps involved there. So as I mentioned before, we'll have
basically two different topics. The first one is how to build CNNs and by this I mean how do you actually define
your CNN architecture to set it up to be trained. And then the second set of topics today is how do you train CNNs?
So starting with the first set of topics here, we'll go through the layers in convolutional neural networks.
And if you recall from last lecture, we learned about the key layer in these models, which is the convolution layer.
And the way that these layers work is they have these filters. You have a predefined number of filters per one
of these convolution layers, in this case six. They match the depth of your input data here.
So in this case, we have a 32 by 32 RGB image so we three depth channels. Each of these filters slides across the image
and calculates a score at each point. At that location in the image, you take the dot product of the values in the filter
with the values in the image. So you multiply all these values together, you sum them together and then you add a bias term.
And this is how you calculate each value in your output activation map on the right.
So you have these sliding windows that go across the image. They calculate a score at each position and that's how you get these activation maps.
And you have one per each filter. Normally, we'll do a sort of ReLU or a non-linearity activation function at the end here.
So this is from last lecture. I won't spend too much time on it. The question is, for images the depth
is equal to the number of channels RGB, but here the depth is 6 for the output here.
So if we had a second convolution layer afterwards they would need to be filters that go across all six of these activation maps
so the next layer would be a depth of 6. OK, and then the second layer we talked about,
which is much simpler than the convolution layer, is this idea of a pooling layer. So here it's still this filter that we're
sliding across the image, 2 by 2 filter with stride 2. So we're skipping over. We're not doing every single location.
And here is a max pooling. So we're just taking the max of each of these areas and that's the value we get here.
Or you could do an average pooling. These are both commonly used, I would say. And depending on the architecture,
you would probably just, if you're creating new architecture, you would try both of them and see what performs better here. But the basic idea is to consolidate
among the height and width dimensions for your image. OK, so we've basically gone over at this point
in the course all the top row here, which is convolution layers, pooling layers and also the fully connected layers.
These are the first layers that we talked about in the neural networks lecture where it's basically one matrix multiply followed
by an activation function. And for the rest of this lecture, I'll talk about the remaining layers
that you see in CNNs, at least the commonly used ones, which include normalization layers, which I'll go into those,
and then also dropout, which is a regularization technique that's used actually in the model
architecture itself. And then finally, we'll revisit the activation functions and I'll tell you about here are the most commonly used
ones both historically and in the modern era of deep learning. So starting out with normalization layers,
the basic idea here is we're going to be calculating statistics like the mean and standard deviation for our input data and then using
those to normalize the data. And then we'll basically learn what
is the optimal distribution for the model to learn at that point. So very concretely we learn parameters
that will scale and shift our input data by a learned mean and a learned standard deviation.
So how all of these normalization layers work is there's two steps. The first is to normalize the data coming in
to be a unit Gaussian, so mean 0, our standard deviation 1. And then we will scale and shift it.
So multiply by some value to increase or decrease the standard deviation and then shift
it to change where the mean is. And all normalization layers do this technique, but the way that they differ is how
they calculate the statistics. So how are you calculating the mean and standard deviation and which values are you applying
these calculated statistics to, but all normalization layers are doing this high level process.
So I'll talk about layer norm, which is the most commonly used normalization layer I would
say today in deep learning. And it's really commonly used in transformers specifically. And so you can imagine you have some data coming in,
x, which is a batch size of n. So we have n samples coming into our model.
And each of these are vectors of dimension D. So what LayerNorm does is we calculate
a mean and standard deviation for each of our samples separately. So we're calculating what is the mean
along the depth or the dimension D here and what is the standard deviation.
Then we learn parameters. And so these are learnable parameters learned via gradient descent in our model
to then apply to each sample. So after we calculate our statistics in this way, treating each sample separately
to calculate the mean and standard deviation, we then apply these learned scale and shift or parameters
here. So we subtract the mean and divide by the standard deviation within our input data to normalize it
and then we apply the scale here with multiplication and the shift. So this is the idea behind LayerNorm.
And at a high level idea all of these different normalization
layers are all computing very similar things, but the main difference is how are they
computing the mean and standard deviation. So this is a really nice visualization
from a paper called Group Normalization that introduces a new way to normalize. Its I would say not so commonly used these days,
but this is actually a really great way to gain intuition about how these different normalization layers are different.
So for LayerNorm I described the really simple case where we just have vectors that were normalizing,
but in the case for convolutional neural networks, we have a channel dimension or the depth
and the height and the width or the spatial dimensions of the image. So what LayerNorm does is for each sample,
we're still processing it separately and we're calculating the mean across all of the channels, all of the heights and all the widths.
So if we look back into this diagram here, you would basically be calculating
one mean and one standard deviation over all of these values. So for each of our input data points
we're calculating one mean and one standard deviation across all of the channels, all of the height and width dimensions.
So this is what LayerNorm is doing. But you could imagine feasibly that you could calculate these statistics differently.
BatchNorm, you're taking each channel so each channel is being calculated as one mean and one
standard deviation. And you're applying it just to that channel and so you're averaging across all the data in your batch.
InstanceNorm is even more granular and then a GroupNorm. So I just want to point out all these layers are kind of trying to do the same thing where you're
basically normalizing your data and then having these learnable scaling and shifting parameters, but the way they do it is different because they're
calculating the statistics using different subsets of your input data.
Yeah, so the question is for LayerNorm, are we calculating one mean and one standard deviation for each image or input data?
Yes, they're all calculated separately, but for BatchNorm it would not be
the case in this example here. Yeah. For BatchNorm it's actually within the mini batch for when
you're doing gradient descent. You have a small batch of data you're looking at. You feed it into your model. You're calculating the per channel
mean and standard deviation based on all of the data in your batch.
Yeah, I think this is a good-- if you can understand this diagram, I think you understand what all the different
normalization layers are doing, so it might be worthwhile after lecture if you still don't fully understand it, just to go through and make sure you understand what--
and shaded in blue, these are the values we're both calculating our statistics over and then applying the mean and standard deviations to.
Yeah, one final question and then we'll go on. For channel, same has the layers? So channel here is the depth here.
So the number of values you have at each spatial location.
OK, cool. So we talked about normalization layers.
The key idea is you're calculating the statistics, applying them to your input data and then learning
a scale and shift parameter that you then apply. So the next type of layer we'll talk about is called dropout.
And this is a regularization layer in CNN's. And this is the final layer that you'll
need to learn in order to-- basically, we can start going through all these different CNN architectures that people have created over the years.
So with dropout, the basic idea is to add randomization during the training process
that we then take away at test time. And the goal is to make it harder for the model to learn the training data, but then it will generalize better.
So this is a form of regularization. The way we do it concretely is that in each forward pass
of our layer, we'll actually randomly zero out some of the outputs or activations from that layer.
And the main parameter you have for this dropout layer, which is just a fixed hyperparameter,
is the probability of dropping out the values. And 0.5 is probably the most common or 0.25
is also commonly used here. So you're just dropping out a fixed percentage of the values here.
And so going forward to the next layer these would be 0. And so you don't really need to calculate the values here.
So I mean, basically all the outputs here are 0 at this point so there's some tricks you can do with masking so you don't
even need to calculate the values because 0 times any value will be 0. So I think in general you might ask, why does this work?
And I would say this is more of an empirical thing than a well
studied from a theoretical standpoint, but there are actually some ways you
can view what dropout is doing to gain intuition of why this might be useful. So it basically forces your network to--
you can imagine it forces it to have redundant representations. So if we have a list of features that we're learning at a given
layer, say the layer right before the output of our model, and we have a CNN that is basically extracting each
of these features so it can detect if there's ears in the image or if there's a tail, if it's furry,
it has claws and you want your model to output the probability of a cat score.
So one of the things that's useful about this is because some of these values might randomly be dropped out during training.
Your model can't over rely on certain features being present in some of the classes
and actually needs to learn a more broad set of correspondences between your features and your output
classes. So the model can't just hard focus on, OK, well, if it has an ear and is furry, it just so happens
that these are always cats or something like this or if it has claws and it has an ear,
it'll almost always be a cat on your data set. So it'll actually help you generalize better to new features, despite the fact that in your data
set there might actually be really strong correlations between the codependency of certain features and your output
class. By having dropout, you're essentially making it so the model can't rely on these during the training phase
because it won't always see the pairs of features together. So this is an example for cat.
And the question is if we had something like tree instead how would you determine which features to drop out?
So the dropping out part is actually completely random so we're not making any choices about this.
It's just in this case 50% of your features at any given step will be dropped out and set to 0.
So yeah, you don't have to make choices about it, which is kind of nice, but it is completely random.
How would the model know if you're only seeing a subset of the features like tail and claw here? The point is you will actually do worse on the training data
because you're only seeing a subset of the features. So it does make the model worse by not having all the information, but then it does better
at test time, this idea. So worst training time and better and test time because at test time you're basically no longer having this drop out.
So the final component here, which maybe I should have explained first before fielding questions, is the idea at test time you're no longer dropping out
any of the values. So this is randomness that we're adding during the training phase only. Then at test time we're never masking
any of the output activations and we're removing this dropout idea altogether.
Now one thing we need to note is that because if we were dropping out 50% of the activations during training time,
at test time, you're basically having 50% more values that are being input to each of your layers.
And so this can cause issues if you don't scale it. So what you need to do is multiply by the probability of dropout so that the magnitude of the values coming
into each layer is preserved during training and test time. Otherwise, if you're dropping 50% of the values and then at test time, you just include all of them,
you'll get really weird behavior because you'll be seeing much larger magnitude of inputs than before.
Yeah, so what about for backward prop? So for back prop when you have these zeroed values,
yeah, it's like you don't need to traverse that path
of your directed graph anymore. It's very similar to ReLU. If you have a zeroed value at that point
the gradient becomes 0. So anything further back in your computational graph,
there's no gradients calculated at that point. If you're dropping out certain values or activations,
the weights associated with those specific activations will not be updated during gradient descent
if you're dropping them out. So the question is-- maybe I'll reframe it. What are we doing at test time?
So at test time, we are using all of the output activations. We're not dropping them out anymore,
but we need to scale by the probability of drop out. So we multiply each of our output activations by this p value because now we're using all of them.
So otherwise you can imagine you have each node is seeing a significantly higher number
of inputs than it did during training at test time. So you need to multiply by this p value to maintain the same magnitude of your inputs coming in.
And the variance stays the same in all these different properties. It works very nicely if you do it like this.
So the question is, can you just add noise to the image instead? The answer is yes and we'll go over how to do that in future slides.
Yes, that's a great idea to add noise to your image OK, some specific code here.
I won't go over this because we already mentioned this, but you're dropping a p percentage of your activations
here and then you multiply here at test time. The next topic I'll talk about is activation functions.
So you all have basically learned all of the key layers now in CNNs. And now we're going to be talking about these activation
functions. If you remember, the whole point of these activation functions is to introduce nonlinearities to our model.
So right now with these convolution operators, the kernel sliding across the image and the fully connected layers without activations,
they're all just linear operations because they're multiplications and additions. And the whole point of the activation function
is to add non-linearity. So historically, sigmoid was a really commonly used activation
function, but there's actually a key problem with sigmoid that is the reason why it's no longer used today.
And so sigmoid, if you graph it, looks like this. You can see the equation in the top right of the slide here.
And the main issue is that empirically what happened
was after many layers of sigmoids, you would get smaller and smaller gradients as you're computing backprop.
So starting from the end, the gradients are fairly large in magnitude. And as you undergo multiple layers of backpropagation,
go to the initial early layers of your model, you would get smaller and smaller gradients as you do this process.
So I'll actually open this question up to the class. This isn't a phenomenon we see that occurs with sigmoid.
And so in what regions in our graph does sigmoid have a really small gradient?
Yeah, so very negative and very positive values is correct. And this is actually a huge issue. I mean, you can visually see here
in the graph the gradient is very flat. You're taking the derivative here. It's very small. And so basically for almost all of our input
space from negative infinity to positive infinity you have very small gradients. And it's only this narrow range in the middle
where you have something that's non-zero so it basically approaches 0 very quickly
on both ends of the extremes. And so this means that if the values coming into sigmoid are very large or very small, then
your gradient will be very small. So this is one of the main reasons
why ReLU became super popular because now in the positive region we don't have any of this behavior.
It's just derivative of 1 here, but in practice, you still have this flat portion here on the left
where your gradient is 0. So now we basically have half of our input domain.
Here we get a gradient of 1 and the other half is 0, which is better than almost all of it being 0 or very close to 0 except for a small region
in the middle. So in practice these work better. Also, it's much cheaper to just compute a max operation between 0 and your input value then
the sigmoid function. So for those two reasons, ReLU became super popular. But you still have this issue where for any negative input
you get a 0 gradient and so more recently there's been popular activation functions that avoid this
by basically having a non-flat section of the activation
function in the nearby neighborhood to near 0. So this is GELU, And there's also SELU,
which I'll show in a slide, but I won't go over the formula. They look very similar. The basic idea is to smoothen out this non-smooth jump here
in the derivative from 0 to 1 at 0.0 for ReLU. So this is a very sharp and non-smooth function with ReLU,
but the nice part about GELU is we actually have non-zero gradients here. And in the limit as x approaches infinity or negative infinity,
it does converge to ReLU as well, but you get more smooth behavior in the middle here.
And specifically what GELU calculates is this Gaussian error linear unit.
So this is the cumulative distribution function of a Gaussian normal.
So if you imagine the area under the curve of a Gaussian, that's what this phi of x is at any point x. So if you have a really negative value
here you'll have a value close to 0, which is why it converges to ReLU 0 here.
And at a very high positive value it gets very close to 1, the area under the curve so it converges to x here.
So this is GELU. It has these nice properties and it converges to ReLU at the extremes too.
And this is the main activation function used in transformers today.
If you look at all of them and you squint, a lot of these look the same. The basic idea is something relatively flat.
And then in the limit, it approaches f of x equals x
and it becomes a linear line. So SELU is actually x times sigmoid
of x, which also has this property of for very negative value, you have something close to 0
and for very positive value it's close to 1. So it's actually similar to the cumulative distribution
function for the unit Gaussian that is phi here. So that's why the shapes are actually really similar looking too.
So you might ask where are these activations used in CNNs
and the general answer is that they're placed after linear operators. So almost any time we have a feedforward or a linear layer
or a fully connected layer, these are all words for the same layer, so matrix multiply followed by a activation function.
Or if we have a convolutional layer, pretty much after these is where we place the-- so after the convolutional layer,
after these linear layers, we'll put the activation function. OK, so you've learned everything now
about all the components of CNNs. And I'll now go through some examples of how we put them together and how people
have created state of the art convolutional neural network architectures.
I think this is a really neat slide because it plots two different values. So on one hand, we have the error rate,
which is these blue bars. And this is over time so these are different models people have trained on ImageNet.
And then you have these orange triangles which represent the number of layers that models have.
And you can see at the same point that we have a significant drop in error where we actually
surpass human performance for the first time, we see a huge increase in the number of layers.
So we'll go over in class today how they were able to achieve this, and what were the design challenges and goals for how they did this.
Historically, AlexNet was the first CNN based paper that worked really well on ImageNet.
And they were able to train it by using GPUs. We talked about this earlier in lecture, so I won't spend too much details around AlexNet from
a historical lens, but I do want to compare it to another architecture called VGG, which was a really standard
and commonly used architecture in the 2010s. And I think I can plot the two CNN architectures together
side by side here. So in general in AI, we like to plot our model architectures using block diagrams, where each block represents
a different layer or a group of layers that are stacked together. And it also helps you gain intuition
about what are the general differences just at an initial glance. So these orange blocks, which are the common ones here,
are 3 by 3 convolution layers. So these are convolution layers that have filters that are sliding across that are size 3 by 3.
Their stride is 1 so they're visiting every location in the image, not skipping over anything.
And they add padding of 1 around the outside so that we're not shrinking as we do these convolution layers.
And so they also add these max pooling layers throughout here
too. And you'll notice that for all of these after a pooling layer they'll start doing two sets of fully connected layers
of dimension 4,096 followed by a dimension of 1,000. And the reason we have 1,000 at the end is because ImageNet was
1,000 different image categories. So we need to have scores for each of these categories. So the final layer is always equal to the number
of classes you have for an image classification problem.
And so you can see it actually looks extremely similar. It's just like a scaled up version of AlexNet with more layers here.
And also they're now doing some three groups of convolutions at a time, followed by pooling rather than two layers
in a pooling or even one. So it's actually pretty remarkable that there's only basically three different types of layers
in these models, but they perform extremely well compared to anything people had tried before at this point.
So these are, I would say, the simplest models we're going to discuss today, but you might ask why are they doing 3 by 3 convolutions.
How do they pick this value? And there is actually some intuition
behind how they chose 3 by 3 and specifically they
have groups of three or even four of these. So I'll ask you all a question. What is the effective receptive field?
So we looked at receptive field last time, but it's basically the idea of the parts of your input image
that a particular value in your activation map has seen before. So what values have been used to compute the final activation
map after many layers of your model? So you have three of these layers that are all 3 by 3 convolutions with the sliding filter
with stride of 1. What is the effective receptive field of each value in our activation map A3 here?
So this is after the third layer. So I'm showing one of the layers here.
You can see for each value in A3 it's computed by looking at a 3 by 3 grid of values in A2.
And then conceivably for each one in A2 it's a 3 by 3 grid in A1. And for each of those it's a 3 by 3 grid in our input.
So I'll let you all think about this for a little bit. Maybe it will help to see the next layer here.
So it is actually really helpful to visualize this. So at A1 each of the corners here,
we're calculating from a new 3 by 3 grid here.
So from our input, how large is this overall square?
7 by 7. Yeah, exactly. So this first one is 3 by 3. This next one is 5 by 5 And?
Then the next one is 7 by 7. And we can visualize it here pretty easily. So the nice thing about the 3 by 3 convolution with stride one
is that you're basically always adding 2 to your receptive field at each layer
because each point here, you're looking to the left and to the right and above and below it.
So after you have many blocks of those, you're just adding two each time.
So we basically just showed that a stack of three of these 3 by 3 convolution and stride 1 layers
has the same effective field as one 7 by 7 layer. Yeah, so the question is how much of this
is justification after the fact versus how much of this is intuition that they then use to, say, design the experiments?
I think it actually probably depends on the architecture. So for some of them it's more intuition focused. And actually the one we're going to cover next I think really
was-- the whole research direction was spawned by an empirical finding that there was a thought experiment about.
So that's ResNets and I think for there, there's actually a pretty good intuition that led the whole investigation into what will work well.
But then for this one, I mean, I can't speak for the authors
whether it's justification after the fact or based on empirical findings or if it
was involved in the design choices because I haven't seen them speak publicly about that yet. But for ResNets, I do know it was the hypothesis that
led to the creation, but this is actually a really nice property. So three of these 3 by 3s have the same effective receptive
field as one 7 by 7 layer. And it actually has fewer parameters too. So if you imagine our channel dimension is staying the same,
you have these 3 by 3 grids where you have your input number of channels.
So 3 times 3 times C would be the number of values in each of these filters. And if we have C of these filters it's 3 times 3 times
C times C or 3 squared C squared. And we have three layers total. So if we look at it through this lens,
it's actually fewer parameters. And we're having a more complex and more nonlinear
model that we're building here. So fewer parameters and it can model more complex relationships
among your input data. So this is maybe why stacking these 3 by 3 layers
together could be better than having just a larger filter that you're sliding across.
So fewer parameters and then also you can model more complex relationships.
OK, I'll now talk about ResNets, which I guess I'll very much bring up the thought experiment that someone just asked a question about.
So there was actually an empirical finding that spawned a lot of the conversation
and thought around designing ResNets. And the idea was actually shown that if you keep stacking deeper
layers on a plain CNN network, something like this and you just keep adding layers to it,
you build it larger and larger, what happens? So what we found and what they found is that the 20 layer model will actually have a lower test
error than a 56 layer model. And you might think that this is because of overfitting, but it's actually not because if we look at the training error,
the training error of this 20 layer model is also lower. So it has a lower training and a lower test error basically
means that the model is doing better on all accounts. So why is this 56 layer model performing worse
than a 20 layer model? It might be confusing. And we know as I mentioned before, it's not
caused by overfitting. So these deeper models have more representational power,
and theoretically they should be able to represent any model that a more shallow network can model.
So the set of possible mappings between your inputs and different values for your larger networks
is a superset for your smaller networks because theoretically you could imagine that you basically
are just setting some of these layers to be the identity function where the layer is doing nothing.
And then if you set half your layers to do nothing, you have exactly the same representation power as a model one half the size.
So the idea is not that these models are worse in terms of the representational power,
but they're actually harder to optimize because the set of possible models for your deeper networks
is larger and it contains all of the possible models that your more shallow networks could learn.
So I hinted at it before, but how specifically could
the deeper model learn to be at least as good as a shallow model? It's by setting. So if we have a two layer model versus a one layer, so one layer
here and two layer on the right, if we set one of the layers to just essentially be an identity matrix or this
is just an identity function, The? Model should be at least as good as the shallow model.
It should be at least as good as the shallow model. So how do we actually build this intuition into our models?
We want them to be able to be just as good as a shallower model if they want to be during optimization.
So the way that we do this is actually by fitting what's called a residual mapping instead
of directly trying to fit a desired underlying mapping. And what this looks like is we basically take the value x
and we copy it over past our convolution layers so that the value at this point is already
receiving x, our original input, as well as the output of our two convolution stacks.
So basically at this point this F of x, which is called the residual map here,
it could just learn zero values for all the conv filters.
And the output would be 0 here. And then we would just add x along here and we would get x.
So it allows a very simple way for the model to bypass these layers if it doesn't need to learn anything
for the layers. And what this means is you can really easily now learn basically this identity function that we talked about earlier
by just learning zero filters. So your filters all are filled with zero values,
for example or in this case more practically what happens is they just need to learn
very small values because instead of learning this entire mapping from x to h of x, they just
need to learn this difference, which is F of x. So you're now just learning this sort
of difference between your desired output here and the copied over block.
This is called a residual block or residual connection when you copy over values from an earlier layer
into a later layer in your model and then you just add it to the values at that point.
So I talked a bit about the intuition, which was this observed phenomenon that these larger
networks were achieving worse training and worse test error because they were harder to optimize.
So the intuition was we need to build a model that can really easily model the shallower networks so it
can be at least as good as a shallower model. The way they did this was by adding a residual connection so that you can just copy over the values easily,
build that into the architecture itself, rather than trying to learn some identity mapping among the convolutional layers.
And empirically, this showed to work extremely well too. Yeah, so what is the residual block carry?
So we have our input x. We pass it through two different convolutional layers and we get our output F of x.
x is just copied over here. So this is exactly the same as x and we add it to the output of these two blocks which is F of x.
Yeah, x is the output of one of the previous layers or if it's the very first layer of the model it would be the image.
Yeah, so the question is if maybe you just don't have enough data and if you added enough data, then maybe you could train a model without these blocks.
I think these blocks actually do extremely help you with learning from more data.
I think the issue, it was really an optimization problem. So transformers used residual blocks for exactly the same reason because--
and I think it actually helps you model these more complex models and it actually enables you to use more data.
So I think it's very good. Residual blocks help you use more data more efficiently because you're able to model a greater number--
you're able to more easily model a greater number of functions. Yeah, so the question is that maybe if we just
trained for longer, the performance would eventually converge to the value of the smaller network.
And maybe it's just harder to optimize because it takes longer to train a larger model. And I think the answer is no, that they were not
converging to the performance of the smaller model, regardless of how long you trained it. And the reason is because it's being stuck
in essentially local minimum. And when you add these residual connections,
you're avoiding these. This is the actual explanation why this is the case is still,
I would say, being a more active area of research. It's really hard to understand exactly what causes
these models to avoid a global or, sorry, to avoid local minimum and not get an optimal solution
or what causes them to not train and find better solutions. And oftentimes this is really an empirical finding,
but there's some intuition behind it. And in this case, the intuition was that we want to enable our models to do at least as
well as the shallower models, which we know were performing better at the time. So it's not that you could just train it for longer
and it would do better. It was actually a limitation it was just
completely unable to achieve as good as the shallower models.
OK, so here's the overall ResNet architecture.
We have these stacks of residual blocks now. So that's what these two blocks here together mean.
It's a residual block. So we have a 3 by 3 convolution with a ReLU followed
by another 3 by 3 convolution. And we're copying over this x value here. We're adding it to the outputs here
and then we're having a ReLU afterwards. So each of these pairs of blocks is one of these residual.
And that's why you see this line skipping over here because the value is getting added forward.
The cool thing about ResNets also is that they basically had a lot of these different depths
that they created. So they created a whole family of models, some smaller and some larger. And they showed that as they increased the number of layers,
their performance was increasing, albeit the difference in performance as you got to the larger and larger models became smaller.
So it was reaching a point of, given the data set, they weren't able to scale any significant amount by adding
more layers further than that, but they saw significant improvements in performance among especially
the earlier models. And then 101 to 152 is where the performance, it wasn't really changing. It was marginally better, but performance changes maybe
only 1% at that point. Yeah, how did they get the number of 152? I actually don't know how they got the number of 152.
I think they wanted to try different values here. And you can see that-- I mean, they're not exactly doubling,
but there's a significant increase in each time. I don't know how they picked 152.
That's a good question. Maybe they showed it somehow worked better than other. I actually don't though.
So generally when you're trying multiple different number of layers for your model, given that
say these are the number of layers you want to try, what you'll do is you'll first train the smallest model,
see performance and then add more layers, see if your performance increases and go on so forth. So that's probably why they stopped at 152
is because performance wasn't increased as much anymore. And also there's GPU memory limitations
so as you get larger and larger models, it becomes harder to train from a hardware perspective because you need to fit more parameters into your GPU memory.
So there is a limit for, given your compute setup, how large of a model you can train.
I think you need to train these models separately though, so you have one model run for 18 layers and one
for 34, et cetera. So the question is how to think of intuition of CNN blocks,
given we're using these residual connections because you can still think of it as higher levels of abstraction.
And this is shown to be true in the layers. So instead of learning--
within the block itself, instead of just learning the higher level features, you're learning the delta from the original image to get the higher level features.
That's what you're learning in the block. So you're learning the delta, but you're still achieving these higher level representations at each step.
So that part is the same, but the actual functional way of doing it is you learn this F of x that you
add your previous input to. So it's like you're learning the delta. The question is, if you do addition,
does that require you to have the same tensor size? The answer is yes. And it's part of the reason why it's really
the nice property that all of these ones have this 3 by 3 convolution with stride 1 and 1 padding
so that you maintain the same size at every layer going forward. So after you had, say, a pooling layer, I mean,
you could maybe come up with a way to do it where you unspool the values,
but after pooling layer, for example, you couldn't do a naive addition anymore because the size of your tensors are different.
So these are done before a pool, at least the regular one.
I mean, you could get around it by just having each value be spread out into multiple values, for example.
OK, so these are basically the main takeaways for ResNets. One other neat trick they do is they basically
periodically after a certain number of these blocks, they'll double the number of filters and downsample the spatial dimension.
So basically you can imagine if you start with a really flat image, as the activations get
pushed through the network, it becomes smaller spatially, but then the depth is larger. So this is how to think of it.
And then at the very end, it just becomes a vector that you then use for classification. So that's how you should be visualizing what's
happening to the values in the network itself and the shape of them. And then one other sort of thing that's
somewhat unique to ResNets, other architectures do this too, but before all these layers with the residual blocks,
they have this relatively larger convolutional layer. And here is just empirically shown
that it did better if they added this here. So this one is purely empirical finding.
OK, I think basically to highlight,
it did extremely well, these larger models. It was the first time they were able to train 100 plus layer models successfully so it was a really big deal.
And basically ResNets were used in a huge variety of computer vision tasks afterwards.
Almost every task in computer vision was using a ResNet at the time because they performed so well because of these residual connections.
So we talked about some CNN architectures, the main one being ResNet and then also VGG historically.
So we talked about why the smaller filter size is useful and having many layers of these is useful.
So the final thing I'll talk about in terms of how we actually construct the CNNs and prime them to be ready for training is how do you actually
initialize the weight values of the individual layers? So depending on what values you choose,
you could either put values that are too small or too large, which would cause significant issues for your model
during training. So here it's basically a six layer network where we have
4,096 dimensional features. And this is just six layers of fully connected model
and we initialize them. Here this is getting a unit Gaussian random and then we multiplying it by 0.01
to get very small values close to 0 and we have ReLU at each layer too.
So if you plot the forward pass of this model, you would actually see that at the beginning
you get a relatively high-- because there's ReLU so all the means are going to be positive,
but you'll have a mean and standard deviation that is relatively high. But as each layer progresses, because we
had a really small weight initialization, it becomes smaller and smaller mean and standard deviation.
And really ideally we would want basically all of these to be the same for each layer because it makes our optimization problem much
nicer to solve. So if we say use 0.05 instead of 0.01,
can anyone imagine what might be the issue here if we set it to too large of a value?
So when it's too small, it goes to 0, basically. What happens if it's too large?
Yeah, basically the activations get larger and larger at each layer. So if you plot it here, you can see that by the end
there's some massive mean and standard deviation. And if you're training 152 layer ResNet and you
can imagine that this becomes quite an issue very quickly. So how do you actually do this?
So in this case maybe the optimal value I think is 0.022 or something, but how would you actually know that
and how would you do this more generally across any layer? There are a few different ways you can initialize weights.
And I'll go over the most commonly used one today in class, but no, there are other ones. And generally what they're a function of
is the dimension of your values here. So you'll have a different value for a 4,096 dimension fully
connected layer versus a 2048. And the specific formula we'll go through is called Kaiming Initialization.
It's actually the same person who created ResNets. So Kaiming, he was very famous.
I mean, he still is a very famous computer vision researcher. I think he's one of the most widely cited computer scientists of the last 10 or 15 years, maybe the most.
So he's extremely well known in the computer vision community. And he also came up with this idea
of initializing the values to the square root of 2 over your input dimension size.
And I won't go over all the details for how they derived this and showed that with a ReLU
activation, this will cause the standard deviation and mean to be relatively constant throughout the layers. But if you do plot it, you see this does have the effect
so you can almost think of this as a magic formula where if you plug it in get the desired properties. And if you want to know the derivation,
you can actually-- we link the paper here so feel free to look into that, but you can just take our word.
I won't go through the details here, but it does this desired effect where the mean and standard deviation is unchanging.
And you can also imagine that for any given setup, you could also, just through testing, try to find what is the value here.
OK, so these are how you we discuss how you initialize weights, how you
combine these different layers together to form a CNN architecture, which activation functions
people use, and then all the different layers in CNNs. So I think already we covered quite a few topics. So I think I'll pause very briefly
to see if there's any questions about these. And the second part of the lecture, it's actually much less dense than the first part.
So we'll be mainly going over a lot of nice practical tips for when you're training these models.
So the question is, how do you do weight initialization for CNNs? So you still use the same initialization,
but your dimension n here is the size of your kernel. So if you have a 3 by 3 kernel with channels
say 6 would be 3 times 3 times 6, but it's the same idea. It's just you calculate your dimensions differently
depending on the layer, the type of layer. You can think of it as the number of values roughly
in each operation, but it does depend on the layer. And some layers use different weight initializations,
but this is specifically for CNNs how this initialization applies to it. Yeah, so the question is, why do your activations
explode if you have too large of an initialization value? So you imagine at each layer of your initialized network
you have a set of randomly initialized values. And if they're very large, then when you do your--
you have a ReLU activation afterwards. And that doesn't actually cap the outputs of your layer.
You can go to infinity with ReLU. So if you have too large of a set of values
that you're essentially repeating the same operation on because you're initializing all the weights to the same set of random values, then at each layer,
you'll be multiplying one set of large values by a set that's been initialized to large so
that it becomes larger at each iteration afterwards. I mean, you could think of it as it's like a recurrence relation
where because they're all initialized randomly at the start where it's being multiplied by a value
and you would want in a simple recurrence relation, you'd want it to be one. But because we have a vector of values
that are being multiplied by our matrix, it depends on the dimension of the vector, what your average output would be and after the ReLU because you
have basically a standard deviation for what is your activations. Then you remove all the negative ones
and you're left with what are your outputs at that point and if you have a really large values, you have a really large standard deviation.
So when you remove the bottom half of it, your mean starts moving more positive and more positive.
Did that make sense to-- I didn't have slides to show it, but OK. Mostly, sorry. Yeah, you can see more details in the paper.
It's actually not too bad to read I think.
So the conclusion of the discussion here is that normalization would solve this activation issue
where they're blowing up, but it still might be harder to optimize. Maybe we should probably do a follow up
post explaining this in more detail, but I think it's a really good question actually, yeah. It would solve, I think, this particular issue,
but maybe it's still hard to optimize this in the discussion. Yeah, it's a good question.
OK. Cool. So I'll talk about these steps now.
So how do you actually train your model? And the nice thing for data pre-processing is it's really easy for images.
So if you have your giant image data set, the standard way to do it is you calculate the average red,
the average green, and the average blue pixel along with the standard deviations. And you take your input image, you subtract the mean
and you divide by the standard deviation. And this is how you do data normalization for images.
Is actually very straightforward. So it does require you to pre-compute the means and standard deviation for each pixel channel.
So sometimes what people will do is they'll use means that have already been calculated. A very common one is to use the ImageNet
means and standard deviations and apply those to your input images, even if you're training a model not
on ImageNet. So it is very data set dependent is the way to think of this.
And different models will use different values here depending on their data set, but the most commonly used one is just use the mean and standard deviation
from ImageNet. Yeah, so any input image, you apply this operation
before the model sees it.
So yeah, that one was really quick. And then in terms of data augmentation, so someone had a suggestion earlier in the class
why don't we just add noise to our image. And that's a great idea. And we'll talk about the different ways you can add noise
to your image here. This helps with regularization and helps prevent your model from overfitting.
So we talked about it before, but this is a common pattern with regularization, where during training time
you add some kind of randomness. And then at testing time you then average out the randomness. So sometimes this is approximate,
but for example, for dropout, we saw that during training time we'll randomly drop, say, 50% of the activations.
And then at testing time we'll use all the activations, but then we'll need to scale it down by this probability of dropout p.
So this is a really common pattern. And it's also used for data augmentation. So you can imagine this being this cylinder here
is like your data set. You load an image and a label. So we have a cat label and we have our original image
from our data set. Before we actually pass it into our model, it's extremely common and basically always in modern deep learning,
people will always use data augmentation for training computer vision models.
But the basic idea is to apply some transformations to the image to make it look different but still
recognizable for the category class and then pass that to your model and you're computing the loss here.
So one of the nice benefits of this is you can effectively increase the size of your data set because instead of seeing each image multiple times,
it will be seeing different versions of the image with different transformations that all still are the same category label.
So you can basically get more data and therefore it increases your generalization capabilities,
but your training loss will be higher because you're not just seeing the same example over and over again.
So it makes it harder for the model to just memorize. So how do we know the weight initialization is just right?
So we know it's right in this case, because the means and the standard deviations are relatively constant throughout the layers
of the network. And we're not seeing-- in this case, we saw mode collapse to 0.
In this case, it was blowing up to infinity as we increased the number of layers.
So the way you can ensure it always happens is by using the formula. This will always initialize them well.
So in practice that's how people do it. If you were creating a new layer that
maybe does some different kind of operation that no one's done before, then you probably would need to try a bunch of different weight initialization
schemes and see what works best. But generally for these linear layers
or the convolutional layers, you can use this formula here,
which is called the timing initialization. OK.
So back to data augmentation, so what are the different augmentations you can do specifically?
So one of them is horizontal flipping. This depends on the problem. So if you want to have a model that
reads text this would be a very bad augmentation to use because the text is now-- it's like you're looking through a mirror
and you can't read it properly. So this is sometimes useful for everyday objects.
It's usually pretty good because most objects are symmetrical so this property actually works pretty well.
And then you could also imagine if you're looking maybe at images from a microscope or overhead that you could also do a vertical flip
and that would make sense. But for everyday objects, vertical flipping actually doesn't really make sense because a cat is almost
always seen in this position, but maybe if you had a data set where cats were in all different orientations, you could imagine that flipping or rotating or all these things
would make sense for your data set. Another type of augmentation is this resizing and cropping idea.
So what ResNets and many different image
models in deep learning do is they basically take a random crop of the image and then resize
that to be your image size. They might even take another crop afterwards. So the most common strategy is you
pick the length of what is basically the short side of your image. So if you have a input image size to your model of 224
by 224 pixels, you would pick a value larger than this first and find some crop of your image that contains this larger scale
L and these are commonly used values. You crop the image.
Sorry, you don't crop. You resize the image to be that scale. So instead say this is a 800 by 600 image,
if we use 256 here we resize the short side, so 600 to be 256
and then 800 would be scaled correspondingly. So we scale it to this L. We scale the short side to L
and then we crop a random patch of 224 by 224 pixels from that image.
So you're scaling the image by first preserving-- you've preserved the relative resolution,
but you make it smaller or larger to fit this L and then you take a random crop of that. And this is by far the most commonly used--
random resized crop is what it's called in most libraries. So this is used in most problems because it works pretty well and it reserves the relative resolution of your images.
And then there's another neat trick you can do with augmentation called test time augmentation. So if you really just want to get the best performance
possible, you can basically get a bunch of these different crops and resizes and run them all through your model
and then average your predictions at the end. And for ResNets, people will often try a bunch of different scales, a bunch of different crop
locations and maybe even flip it. And usually you'll start getting diminishing returns,
but you can get actually pretty good 1% to 2% performance boost by using this sort of test time augmentation. So if you're in a setting where it really matters,
you're trying to eke out every last bit of percentage points, then this is actually a really great trick that you can use for almost any computer vision problem.
OK, so a final few augmentations.
One is color jitter, so here we're specifically randomizing the contrast and brightness
and scaling the image correspondingly. So maybe images look more muted or I say the colors look more muted or more brighter,
but these are very traditional image processing techniques. And usually with all these different augmentations,
you'll try different values and see which ones make your images still look in distribution
and look normal to you as a human. And that's a pretty good way to judge what values you should pick for how much jitter
you should have, how much brightness, variance, et cetera. So normally when I'm starting a problem, I'll try a bunch of these different augmentations.
I'll see what is making the data look different from the original data, but then still recognizable to me and still very easy
to recognize. And that's generally a good set of augmentations to use. Final one is you can imagine just
like cropping out parts of the image where you just are basically putting a black or a gray box over it.
And I think this one's maybe less commonly used, but it kind of shows you how you can get creative with the augmentations
depending on your problem. Say you're in a setting where things will get covered like the camera will be occluded so it won't be able to see
the objects fully, this could be a really neat trick you do to make your model more resilient to stuff blocking parts of your objects.
So you could almost imagine for your given setting, what augmentations make sense. What ways can you transform your input data
so that it's still recognizable to you as a human, but it makes it harder for the model to memorize the training examples?
OK, so the final set of topics here are basically extremely practical.
So when you're, say, doing a project or training a model, so say for your course project,
I think you should basically do the exact things we're going to be describing in the coming slides, but this also applies outside the course
to any computer vision domain you could be practicing in. So in practice in many times we don't actually
have so much data. ImageNet, the original version had a million images. Maybe you don't have a million images for your problem,
which almost none of us do unless you've been collecting vast amount of data with a huge team. So if you don't have a lot of data, can you still train CNNs?
And the short answer is yes, you can, but you need to be a little bit smart with how you do it.
So I think in one of the-- I think maybe it was last lecture, we showed how the different filters in your CNN
are extracting different types of features. So this goes back to someone asked about the hierarchy of features in convolutional neural
networks. So at the beginning, it's more of just edges or patterns or really small shapes.
And then at the highest level, you can imagine if we put an image into our CNN
and we get this final vector right before we get our class scores, and we compare that to other images in our data set,
you'll actually see that these values of the vector of our image are actually really close.
So you can think of this as the nearest neighbors thing we did before, but instead of it being the pixels of the image where
we're looking at the vector at the very end of your CNN right before you have the classification layer,
so this would be like the 4,096 or the 2048 layer. And if we look at the difference here, it's the L2 distance.
You'll find that for a given image, if you put it into your model and you look at the other images that are
close to the model in this vector space right here after you go through all the layers except the last one, that you'll find the images are extremely
close to each other when the items are in the same category. So intuitively, what this basically means
is that these features here are actually really good at--
you could build a linear classifier on top of them or a K nearest neighbor classifier
and be able to classify objects extremely well. So how could you use this in practice?
So what you would do is you would first train your model on ImageNet or you would just
grab a model someone else is trained on ImageNet or one of these really large web internet scale data sets.
And you can just freeze all of these layers so you don't train any of them. You keep them exactly the same as before and you replace this
final layer instead of it being in the case of ImageNet 1,000 classes, you replace it with the number of classes you have
in your data set. And then when you're training the model, you only train this layer here. So if we think about we talked about how
in the old paradigm of computer vision you had feature extractors, which was a predefined set of operations
to get stuff like color histograms and other predefined features. You could almost think of the frozen model as doing this.
It's a predefined feature extractor that we're not changing in any way, but we're using it to calculate features that we then
train a model on top of. It's actually extremely similar under that paradigm because you're not training it here.
And if you have a larger data set, what tends to work best in practice is to actually train the whole model,
but you're initializing it from these values that were pre-trained on ImageNet or some other really large internet
scale data set. So I think pretty much for all of the problems I ever work on, I'm doing this step three here because I have maybe
a million or 10 million training examples. So I'll start it with a model that was trained on billions
that I don't have the compute for and then I'll fine tune the model on my relatively
smaller data set. And I'll get better performance than if I just tried to train a model myself. Because the model is basically seen more data.
It's created a better feature extractor. And then when I fine tune the whole thing, it can still be specific enough to my problem.
You're basically taking-- say let's use a very concrete case where we're training a model on ImageNet.
We're taking this model and we're replacing the final layer so that it's no longer outputting 1,000 classes.
It's outputting the number of classes in your data set. And we're initializing this randomly using the Kaiming
Initialization we talked about before, but the rest of these layers are maintaining their values that they had before.
So we're not changing these values and during gradient descent we're never changing these values. So these values are unchanged.
We basically take our image. We pass it through our model. And now it's just like we have a-- it's almost like you're just
training a linear classifier where your input are these 4,096 vectors for each image that we calculate by passing it through
the whole model. Then we have our vector of 4,096. And we're just mapping that to the number of classes.
And we're only training this mapping at the end. Yeah, so the question is, will you have some bias in your model
because it was trained on ImageNet? The answer is definitely. So the model if you do this number two,
this way of training, then it will do best on data sets that look very similar to ImageNet.
So these would be pictures of everyday things like laptops or maybe a classroom or a person, things like this where
ImageNet is everyday objects. But if it was, say, photos of Mars, it would do a lot worse. So there's definitely bias based on the training
data of the pre-trained model. And you want to get something that is in the same type of distribution where you're seeing the same kinds of objects or locations
or things like that. So the question is, what do you do when your data set is out of distribution?
I actually have a slide here to cover some of that. So it's a great question.
So if you have a very similar data set but very little data, you can use the linear classifier
strategy we just mentioned. If you have a similar data set, quite a lot of data, you'll get best performance by fine tuning all the layers.
These are strategies two and three on this slide that I mentioned earlier. But what about when you have a very different data set?
So if you have a lot of data you might just want to start from scratch or you might get better performance
if you still initialize. Here you would test, but there's no guaranteed way to know that performance would be better or worse.
And then, yeah, if you have very little data or a very different data set, you probably want to try to find a model that's trained on something close.
There are specific techniques that researchers have looked into for out-of-domain generalization
and this basic idea of you have one domain, you train a model on one domain and you're trying to learn a new domain, that's different in some ways.
So this is an active area of research, but I wouldn't say there's a general technique that always works and it's a bit problem dependent in that setting,
whereas this is for everything except the upper right quadrant here. It works pretty well in practice.
So there are actually techniques for this. And it's a pretty active area of research. And certain models generalize better. I think language models are pretty
good at learning a lot of different domains, for example. But yeah, it's definitely the worst scenario
to be in where you have a completely different problem that anyone's ever worked on before and you don't have a lot of data. It's by far the hardest to train a model in that setting.
So the question is, do you ever do anything between training one final layer and all layers? Yeah, people have actually done a lot of work looking into training a subset of the layers.
There's also a technique called LoRA, which we might go into in the transformers lecture. I'm not sure if they'll make it this year,
but the basic idea is to fine tune all the layers in a way where you're not changing all the values exactly, but you're learning basically low rank
differences between the different layers where you're fine tuning the differences
between the original layers rather than fine tuning the layers themselves. So yeah, there's techniques you could use LoRA.
And it would need more explanation, but the basic idea is instead of fine tuning the actual values,
you're fine tuning these differences between the value layers like how a ResNet, you're learning the difference.
LoRAs are like that, but you do it with a very small number of parameters. I think the question is, how do they basically
decide how many layers to pick? Why did they pick a large number of layers? Specifically why are there two convolution layers
of each size instead of one? So it's actually really similar to the example we showed earlier with VGG where if you have three of these 3
by 3 convolutions, you're able to have the same receptive field as a 7 by 7 convolution, but you're
able to model more non-linear relationships because you have these three activation functions rather than just one activation
on the 7 by 7 filter. So basically 3 by 3 is more expressive, but you're still looking at the same set of values
as long as you have enough of them. So a larger set of smaller filters is more expressive than a smaller set of larger filters.
OK, so we'll go on.
Yeah, basically try to find a large data set that has similar data. Get a model that was trained on that and then fine tune it on your own data.
Some good links. PyTorch image models has a bunch of models that are trained on ImageNet and other data
sets and then also just in the PyTorch version, a GitHub repo. You'll find some too. OK, I'll talk over very briefly at the end
for hyperparameter selection. So if you're having difficulty training your model and it's not working right away, I
think the best thing you can do is to overfit on a small sample. So this is the default debugging strategy
in deep learning where you just have one data point and you want to see your training loss basically go to 0. Your model should be able to memorize one training example
and if it's not able to do that have a bug somewhere in your code or you're not picking the right kind of model to model your problem.
So this is a really good training problem. And it'll also tell you what learning rates work
or what ones don't work. And you'll get a rough idea of the neighborhood of learning rates you should explore. So this is a good way to make sure your model is correct,
make sure your learning rate is reasonable and also to make sure you don't have any other bugs that
could be impacting your code. So this is always step one. If you're having issues just running some code,
this is how you debug. The second thing you would want to do after you get this is maybe you try a very coarse grid
of hyperparameters. So I would first try with different learning rates and see how if you trained model on different learning rates,
what do the training losses look like. You want one that has the most sustained decreasing in the training loss over maybe one epoch.
That's a pretty good estimation, but you can train for longer. Once you get a good set of learning rates,
you could then look into other hyperparameters too. And specifically, besides the loss, you'll also want to look at the accuracy curves.
So you have your training accuracy and your validation accuracy. If they're still going up, it means
you want to keep training pretty reasonable, but you might have a scenario where the training loss is going up, but your validation loss is going down.
This is overfitting. So we need to either increase the regularization
or if we can get more data, that could also work, but you need to do one of the two in order to improve your performance further
beyond the peak right here I guess would be the best model you have so far. If you're seeing very little of a gap here,
then you can probably train for longer because generally you do want to just get to the point where your validation loss has
been maximized. So if you could just keep training, you could keep training. So even if there's not a significant gap here
or anything, if you see the validation accuracy is
similar to the training accuracy, you can probably keep training until your training accuracy starts diverging from your validation accuracy.
And you basically can repeat this process over and over again. One final note is in terms of for hyperparameter search,
normally people think you have two hyperparameters or more that you're searching over, should you try every combination of the hyperparameters
or what is the best way to do it? I think in practice, random search over the hyperparameter space works a lot better than a grid search
where you're trying every set of a predefined set. And the reason is mainly because you
can imagine you have one axis, which is an unimportant hyperparameter where depending on the value, your performance will be roughly the same
versus an important one. If you do random values across all of these, you'll actually search the hyperparameter space
of your important parameter much more thoroughly, whereas you're wasting time doing on the grid
search rechecking multiple values for an unimportant hyperparameter. So in practice, you should define
the ranges you want to try and then just randomly collect hyperparameters with values from those ranges.
And that's probably the best way to do it. And you just keep running until you get the best model. OK, that's it.
So we talked about layers in CNNs activation functions, CNN architectures, and weight initialization, how do you actually predefine and build these models
and then we talked about how do you actually train it. How do you change your data to be input to the model? How do you augment it?
Transfer learning is a really neat trick for improving performance and then how do you pick the best hyperparameters. So yeah, we covered a lot in lecture today.
Thank you all so much. Yeah.

So hello everyone. Welcome to lecture 7. I also wanted to go over some clarifications from last time.
So when I gave lecture last time, there were two ed posts that I think were good that you all
might want to check out. But in case you haven't seen it, I'll just go through it really quickly. I think when describing dropout, how
to scale probabilities at test time during lecture, there was a bit of confusion. Basically, what I said in the slide had a mismatch.
So in each forward pass for dropout we have this hyperparameter p, which is either
the amount of neurons you're dropping out or it's the amount of neurons that you're keeping depending on which implementation
dropout you're using. Generally they do. It's the number of the ones you drop out.
So in most libraries that's what p means. But the basic idea is that at test time, you want the expected output to be the same as at training time.
So this means that if you dropped 25% of your activations during training time, at test time, you would scale by 0.75,
so that the expected output is the same. And so I think there was a bit of confusion because in this slide the implementation uses p
as the probability of keeping a unit active. So a bit of a mismatch there.
Just to clarify. There was also a question in class from last time about how normalization can be useful.
And maybe resolve the issues that arise when you have weights that are initialized incorrectly. But we have this choice setting where we have 2D inputs
to our model, and a two layer neural network with ReLU. It's outputting basically this quadrant function.
So if the point lies in the top right, it'll output 1 or 2 or 3 or 4, depending on which quadrant the point lies in.
And we plot the different training losses and test losses for good initialization using the Kaiming initialization
we discussed last time and bad initialization where the standard deviation is too high. And the blue plot here represents bad,
and the green represents bad initialization with LayerNorm. So you can see it actually does resolve a lot of the issues.
But to get the best performance you still need good weight initialization, which are the two lines afterwards. So you can go dive in.
And also, whether or not LayerNorm help depends on the problem. So in this quadrant I, you can imagine that you don't need
to know the exact 2D position of each point. So LayerNorm was actually helping. But for some of the other functions that are in the code,
you can check out, where you need to know the exact coordinate in order to get the right output, LayerNorm actually hurts performance
because you lose some information about the exact spatial location of your input when you're doing the subtraction of the mean
and dividing by the standard deviation. So just some notes here. Basically at a high level, it does help with the issue,
but a gap remains. So you can't get by this weight initialization issue with just normalization.
And as I mentioned, it may not always make sense depending on what you're trying to model.
So I think just to recap also from last time, we've been mainly talking about these sort of vanilla, standard,
non-recurrent neural networks so far. So this is a fixed size input and a fixed size output.
You have this one time setup where you set your activation functions. You do data pre-processing according
to some fixed mean and standard deviation for the images, the image channels. You have your weight initialization
and normalization functions that you use, as well as transfer learning.
So if you pre-train on one data set, like ImageNet or some other large scale internet data set,
you can get better results if you initialize your weights to those values. We also talked about training dynamics,
how you can babysit the learning process in choosing a good learning rate, how you want to update your different hyperparameters,
and also how to optimize those based on the validation performance as well as test time augmentation
to improve performance further. So a really good tool for points 2 and 3 here is something I use in basically all my projects called
weights and biases. So you might find this useful. It's a really neat way that you can essentially
look at different-- you set different runs with different hyperparameters. In this case, they show a dropout column here.
So these are all the different values of dropout. The color coding is really nice. So you can see that generally the lower values of dropout
will achieve higher accuracy. And so you can visualize these different validation--
sorry, these different hyperparameters based on validation set performance. And you can see based on many runs
get an idea of which hyperparameters work best. So I always use this. I think it's great. Especially if you have the compute where you can just
run something over and over again to improve performance more, this is a really neat way of visualizing it. I think they do it well. There are other tools like TensorBoard.
But this is personally the one that I like. OK, so for the rest of lecture today,
we'll be discussing sequence modeling. So this is, in contrast to a fixed sized input
as input to our model, what if we have a sequence of variable length. And also, we'll be discussing what
are the simple neural networks that people use before the era of transformers, which mainly consists of RNNs and some variants of RNNs.
And then I'll also relate in one slide how RNNs actually are similar to a lot of, and inspire a lot of,
the modern type of language models that you see called state space models. So you might have heard of Mamba.
There's some other ones too that we'll talk about in the slide, but the basic idea is the key concepts from RNNs
are still being used today. They're not just used in the past, and they have a lot of nice advantages over transformers that will go into.
Cool, so to specifically formulate this sequence modeling task, you can imagine, we have a vanilla neural network
where we have one fixed size input to one fixed size output, which is what we've discussed in the course so far.
In contrast, you could have a one to many sequence modeling task. So here we still have a fixed size input like say an image,
but we want to output a sequence of variable length. So one common example is image captioning. So we input an image and we want to output
a sequence of words or characters or however you're modeling the language or encoding it,
but the goal is to have a variable length caption output for what's happening in the image.
You could also have a many to one sequence modeling task. So here we could imagine our inputs are, say, a video
and we're trying to classify what is this a video of. So we give it a sequence of video frames.
And the output is one single class label similar to the image classification case. But now we have multiple frames as input
rather than just a single image. So this is an example of many to one. And then you also have many to many.
So the number of inputs and outputs in the sequences
don't need to match, so you could have your input as a variable number of frames, and your output in this case
could be a caption of variable length, and they don't need to necessarily match, but they could match.
So for every single input you have one output. And for discussing RNNs we'll mainly be focusing on this setting on the far right.
But there are basically a lot of small changes you can make to change and reformulate the problem to apply
to the other settings, but this is the most straightforward one. Every time there's an input, there's an output, and we'll be using it for the beginning of class
to talk about how RNNs work. And a canonical example problem here
would be video classification, where you're classifying every single frame. OK, so what is an RNN?
The basic idea is you have an input sequence x, and an output sequence y.
And what makes an RNN an RNN is this recurrent nature. So often people will diagram it by this arrow that's
feeding back into the block. This is how you know it's a recurrent layer when you're reading different diagrams.
But what it actually means is that RNNs have this internal state or a hidden state,
as it's often called, that is updated as a sequence is processed. So every time there's a new input to the model,
we process that and we calculate a new hidden state or internal state. So there's a hidden state, it updates,
and it depends on the new inputs as well as the previous internal or hidden state.
I think this diagram is sometimes a bit confusing when you're trying to think about how the gradients are actually calculated and what are the order of operations.
So people will often do this diagram of an unrolled RNN. And so here it's basically the same as before,
but we're explicitly showing that the current hidden state calculation is dependent on our input at that time step
as well as the previous RNN state. So we're more explicitly modeling what is exactly
needed to calculate each output, and each RNN you move backwards in the computational graph.
So I've been speaking with words so far. So let's formulate this with mathematical equations now.
So the basic idea is we're trying to process a sequence of vectors, x.
And we're applying this recurrence formula at every single time step. So we have our new hidden state as a function
of the old hidden state and the input vector at some time step as well as we have a function with normally with an activation
function along with some parameters, W. So you can think of this as this very similar to the initial neural network
layers we were learning where it's a weight matrix, multiply by and then you follow it up by an activation function.
This is the same thing here. The only change is that it's now a recurrence formula. So we're using the same set of W's and the same activation
function each time we're computing the hidden state. So basically, as I mentioned, this is a recurrence formula.
And to get the actual output, so how do we calculate this blue block? We have a separate function that depends
on a separate set of parameters that convert our hidden dimension state into the dimension
of our output. And also is a set of weights to convert the hidden state to the output. So this does two and one.
It changes the dimension of our vectors from the dimension size of our hidden state, which can be whatever we want to the dimension size of our output.
And then also it provides a transformation there. So W hy is a weight matrix that you will multiply by your hidden
state to get the-- so it does two things. It converts your hidden state to the dimension of your output.
So your hidden state and output could be different dimensions. And then also, it's a weight matrix that you learn.
So not only does it do this dimension change, but also it applies a transformation to your hidden state.
So it's how you convert your hidden states to your outputs, what W hy is.
So the previous slide was how we calculate the new hidden state. So it's essentially the same idea
where you're doing this recursively with the same set of parameters, but we have one set of parameters and one function for calculating
the hidden state. We have another set of parameters and another function for calculating the output depending on what type of task
it is, and how we want to model the RNN. Yeah, so they still share the same weights for each time step,
but there's two different things here. One is to calculate basically how do you-- maybe it'll be more clear as we go through more concrete examples.
But how do you actually calculate the new hidden state, which is this internal state of the RNN. And then how do you convert that hidden state
to the output, which is this slide. So looking through this unrolled diagram here,
we can see that you need to initialize your hidden state to some value. So we usually call this h,0 and you can initialize it
to whatever you want. In principle, usually this is a learned input vector,
but now we'll specifically go into each step of this unrolled recurrent RNN and actually
go through a concrete example for what it looks like when you're doing the forward pass. So one thing to note that already came up
with some of the questions is that we're processing the sequence of vectors x, and we're applying this recurrence formula at each time
step. So you really do notice how the same function and the same set of parameters are used at every time step
when computing the hidden state. And a separate function and a separate set of parameters are always used at each time step
when predicting the output from the hidden state. Yeah, so can old values of y affect the new hidden state?
Under some formulations, yes. And we'll actually go through one example of why that's used. It's most commonly used if you want to predict the next--
if you're doing a language modeling or autoregressive modeling task where you're trying to predict one value given the previous values,
people will just use the previous values as the input. So that's generally how people do that explicit formulation of how can y
affect the next hidden state. What is the difference between h and x at the first time step?
So they use basically different weights. So the h,0 is using all of-- it's using the weights that are
used to update every hidden state to the next one. We'll go through exactly what the weights look like,
but basically they're using different weights, is the short answer. So when people say Vanilla RNN, they usually
are almost exactly referring to this type of model where we have our hidden state t, which
uses tanh or hyperbolic tangent as an activation function. This is nice because it's bounded between 1
and negative 1. So as you do the operation over and over again, your values will stay within this range.
So this is a nice property to have. It's also zero centered and you can represent both positive and negative values. This is why people use tanh.
Also we sometimes have an output function fy here,
but in the simplest case your output yt could just be a matrix multiplied by your hidden state.
So this is really the most simple formulation of an RNN. And what we'll specifically go in our concrete example
today in lecture is this idea of just manually creating a recurrent neural network.
So we're not going to learn this through gradient descent or all these different methods. I'm just going to show you how you could construct one by hand.
And we'll go through it and you'll understand the forward pass, what each of the different weight matrices are doing,
as well as how the output is calculated. So in this really toy example because it needs to be pretty simple, if we're just
going to be going through all the different weights. You're given sequences of 0's and 1's, and your goal
is to output a 1 when there's two repeated 1's in a row. So you're basically detecting repeated 1's and you'll
output a 0 otherwise. So you can see this input sequence coming in 0, 1, 0, 1.
So far, there's been no repeated ones. But now we have a repeated one, and we have another repeated one because there's two in a row
here and so on. So this is the type of model we're building. It's trying to do this task. This is specifically the many to many sequence modeling tasks
where we have one output for every input. And so we've been talking high level so far,
but if you're trying to create an RNN to do this, what information should be captured in the hidden state?
So you have this internal state of your model, what information needs to be captured there in order to do this task?
Yeah, so the input to the previous time step. And if our output is only dependent on the hidden state, what else do we need to know?
And the current-- Yeah, exactly. So this is the information that we need to capture in our hidden state.
So previous input and the current value for x, so 0 or 1. And the way I'll do this is I'll just
set the hidden state t to be a three dimensional vector. The reason why it's 3, is this one will come in handy when we're trying to do the output stage calculation,
but you could probably construct one without a 1 here. This is just to make the math easy and simple
for the purposes of the lecture today. And the other information is the current value. So this will either be 0 or 1 along with the previous values
0 or 1. And we'll initialize it to be 001, so that we're basically assuming it's basically seeing two zeros
in a row before at this point. Yeah, so this is how we will do.
This will be the type of variables we're trying to track in our hidden state. And this is how we'll initialize h,0.
So I talked about how you can initialize it to very different strategies, or you could learn it. This is what we'll initialize it to
OK, now let's walk through the code and I'll do it step by step. So I'm just putting it on screen here right now.
But we'll also do ReLU, I guess, sorry, one other thing I missed on this slide is that we're
setting our activation functions to be ReLU, just to make the math easy. So it'll just be max of 0 or whatever the value is.
We're only dealing essentially with zeros and ones in this case. So it makes it pretty simple to think about.
Yeah, You probably could construct it so that it works with tanh. But this is just something that I
created as an example for how to run it. And so just to make the math really easy, we'll just do ReLU.
But yeah, you could conceivably make a model that could do this with tanh. Yeah, cool.
So we have ReLU. We have two specific weights here. We have the first weight, which converts
our previous hidden state. It applies a transformation to the previous hidden state
onto to calculate the next one. And then we have this weight here, which converts our input x to the dimension of our hidden
state, as well as applies a transformation. So we are setting this second one.
So our current hidden state is a function of the previous hidden state, along with the current time
step. And so when we're trying to calculate this hidden state at time step t, we're looking to calculate this current value
first. So we'll use the x value here. We'll set the weight to be a 3 by 1 column vector with values
1, 0, 0, such that when x is 0 and we do the matrix multiply,
we get a 0 vector, and when x is 1, we'll get 1, 0, 0.
And we'll add this to another term, but basically, this is going to be calculating what is the current value here. So it'll be either a zero on top or a one on top.
And it's calculated based on this first operation here.
So that's how we're calculating the current value based on the input.
Now we'll talk about, how are we doing this hidden state transformation.
So we want to just use the current value for this top value here. So in our weight matrix, we'll just have zeros in the top row.
This means that when we multiply it with the previous hidden state we'll get a 0 value here for the top.
So it'll be 0 plus whatever value the right hand side contains. So that's how we're going to maintain this not changing based
on the previous hidden state. And we'll set it to be 1, 0, 0 for the next row.
Why we do this? Is you can imagine we have the hidden state from the previous time step here.
And we want to set the now previous to be the former current time step.
So we have a 1, 0, 0. What this will do is it'll multiply by h,t minus 1. We'll set the current value over to now the previous value
for this time step. So basically this term will be a zero on top,
and it will be whatever the previous time step input value was as the second term. And then this final bit here just maintains the one
so that we're keeping this one across all calculations. So just to recap, we have zeros here
because we want the right hand side term to be tracking this current value.
We have a one here to copy over the current from the former time step to be the previous-- sorry to copy the current of the former time step
to be the previous of the current time step. So we're just doing h--
maybe it's easy in the code but h,t previous is equal to h,t, and we want to also move the corresponding value down one
here. And then this is just a copy of the one. So how do we actually get our output now?
So we basically talked about how we can track these values given the weight matrices I talked about, so Whh and Wxh
So if we have a weight matrix to convert our hidden state into the output dimension,
we want it to be 1 by 3. So it's a single value that's being output when we have
this hidden dimension as input. And this is a dot product between the values here
and the values here. So what this will correspond to is the current plus the previous minus 1 because we multiply the minus 1
here. This is where the one became useful, and the current associated here with a one.
And then also the previous associated here with the one as well. So that's how we actually do it.
And if you think about it, this general formula will work.
So if say we're looking here, we have the current plus the previous is 2 minus 1 is 1 for this left hand
term inside the ReLU. So the max of 1 and 0 is 1. And if these are both 0, you'll have a minus 1, so we'll get 0.
These are a 1 and a 0. Then you'll still get 0. So these are how you can construct these weight matrices.
But I actually wanted to pause briefly and talk about if there were any questions about any step
among this calculation, because this is the only example we'll go through in class, where we're literally doing all the matrix
and vector multiplications, and the rest will be more high level explanations for how people tend
to put these layers together. So I just want to pause and see if there's a question about how
the matrices and vectors are tracked and multiplied and updated. Yeah, so the question is, how do you
go about constructing the weight matrices? Which is a really great question, and I thought to put it in the slide here.
So how would you actually do this? It's the same way we're always finding the weight matrices in this class. We're going to be using gradient descent.
And we'll talk about how you do gradient descent when you have multiple time steps, and maybe you have losses computed at each time step as well.
So that'll be a lot of what we go into right next. So it's a great question and very relevant to the lecture.
So this is just an example, so you can see how all of the weight matrices are multiplied.
Basically, if you were trying to change-- if you were trying to initialize with this, and then train it to do another task,
that would be transfer learning where you're initializing the weights with this.
But in practice, I don't think it would work very well at all, because your hidden state is really small
and people normally do much larger hidden states. I just wanted to do something that I could fit in the slide
here. Yeah, OK, I'll go over the second row again. So if you imagine we have h,t minus 1 as a column vector here,
when you do the matrix multiply, to get the value of the left hand side here, what this second row is doing is you're taking
the value, and then you're rotating it and doing the dot product with the values here.
So for the second row that gets calculated, the entry here will be equal to the top of the vector here.
So this is how we move the current down to the previous is in this step here. So the end result of this matrix multiply
will be such that the second value is the current value
from t minus 1. So we do the matrix multiply with t minus 1 here,
and so the second row of this operation and this operation are both giving us vectors of the size of our hidden state.
And so we're adding them together. Yeah, the left is doing the previous carryover
and the right is doing the current. And that's also of how it works for RNNs when you are doing it
beyond this toy example, where this weight matrix is being multiplied by the current input, and this other weight matrix
is being multiplied by the previous hidden state. So that's what these weight matrices track more generally
than the specific problem as well. So how do you actually compute the gradients?
Let's look at the computational graph. So just to draw a little bit more explicitly than before,
we have these x1 coming in and x2, and we have a sequence of x's. We're calculating a hidden state at each time step,
and we're specifically using the same W's, same weight matrices for each of these calculations as well.
So we need to be thinking about this when we're thinking about how we're computing the gradients,
and let's start with the many to many scenario. So we have an output for each input.
And in this scenario, you can often also calculate a loss for each output, which is how correct
is the output at that stage. So if we're doing this setting you have a loss at each step,
and you can sum them all together to get your total loss. And this would be your loss across the entire input sequence.
And when we do backprop basically,
when we compute our final loss, we can then calculate the loss per time step as well or depending on the formulation.
So if we're calculating a loss per time step, you can treat them independently. Sometimes you have an overall loss based
on the loss per time step too. We can also get basically the final gradients for each
of these W's. You can calculate the gradient for each time step separately, and then you're going to sum them all together.
So this is how it works in practice. You could imagine if it were different W's at each time step.
You could pretty probably easily see how the computational graph could be structured such that you're calculating a different
gradient for each of these different W's. And so we're essentially treating our single W
for computational purposes as a set of different W's, but then
at the end, we merge all the gradients together because it's just the same weight matrix that's being multiplied. So conceptually, you can think of it as you're just calculating
it for each time step, almost treating it in your head like it's a different W being used, but because it's the same value of the weights,
you just need to sum all the gradients that you calculate at each time step together.
In the many to one scenario, you'll just have a single loss calculated here.
And sometimes you'll only use the final hidden state to calculate the value depending on the problem setting.
Say you're trying to do video classification, it may make sense to use the hidden state from every step, because you might have information about the video
throughout the entire course of the video during classification. You're going to do some pooling, like average pooling or max
pooling or something like that to compute your y value. And then if you have this one to many mapping like in image
classification or sorry, in image captioning, there was a question about how you could incorporate
the previous y's. So you still need to have an input to your f,w
because it's two different of these weight matrices, one that's expecting input vector x,
and the other that's expecting the previous time steps hidden state. So you can imagine that you can put a lot of values in here.
You could just put zeros or you could put the previous output
here. So I explained at a high level how you do the back propagation.
But there's actually some specific issues that you'll run into when you're trying this conceptual-- when you're looking through this conceptual framework that
are very practical in terms of running out of GPU memory, which is always the cause of basically all the issues when you're
trying to train a neural network that and, I guess, NaN loss string training. So when you're computing, say, a loss at each time step,
and you have an extremely long input sequence, it's really easy to understand. You need to be keeping the activations and the gradients
at each time step in memory and then summing them all together. This is going to get extremely large as your input sequence
increases. So what can you do practically to resolve this issue? This is called backpropagation through time,
by the way, when you have the same weight matrix that's being applied in multiple different time steps, and then you're summing the gradient at each time step
together. So what you can do is, it's called truncated back propagation through time.
So you basically fix a time window, and you can look at basically pretending
that this is all the model was trained on so far. We start with our h,0.
We calculate based on the input at time step 1, and our previous h value.
We can calculate what is the current hidden state at h,1, and then we can use that to calculate our output.
We'll have our loss. And we can run this for each of our examples. And you can imagine how in this setting, it's relatively easy to see how you just treat the beginning
sequence as if this is all we're seeing during training. And moving to the next block, now essentially,
you're starting your h,0 with now it's the output of your previous step here. So we're initializing the hidden state with whatever the output
was in our final step, but the gradients are no longer carrying over. So we're basically batching the computational graph such
that we're only looking at the loss in the neighborhood of these time steps at a time. This is a fixed window size that you set.
So this is how you get around this relatively, I would say,
common issue, especially as you have really long input sequences. And so yeah, you basically are batching it out,
and you can just keep doing this for the entire input sequence. So one other thing is that you might ask,
how does this work, if we have just a single output at the very end? So you can still calculate the gradients at each time step,
but you will no longer have this loss that's
dependent on the time step itself, the output of the time step itself, rather you'll be relying on upstream gradients.
So you can imagine we're looking at the far right of the diagram here, and we have our loss that we calculate based on the output of the final time step.
We can calculate what is the gradient with respect to our current hidden state at the end.
And then we have our Whh matrix to help us understand how did the previous hidden state contribute
to the final hidden state. And we can use that to calculate the gradient
and understanding based on the previous hidden state and the weight matrix. How can we change this transformation matrix Whh such
that we would be changing our loss? And then basically just applying the gradient rule to Whh
over and over again here. And you're only looking at how the hidden state changed the next hidden state, and how that contributed to the loss.
So you look at the final example here. This tells you how changing the hidden state depends on the loss, and then how the previous hidden states,
how they change, how that affected the current hidden state which is given by this Whh matrix.
So using different W's at each time step would essentially mean that you're no longer modeling it
as a recurrence relation. So basically you can think of it as one layer for each different possible time step.
So you would probably see worse performance because if you are no longer modeling it as a sequence
recursively, you're just-- imagine you train a neural network where you have a series of inputs, each one has a separate weight that it goes to--
Independently. Yeah, independently. That would make sense for a problem where it's not a sequence modeling problem,
you just have a set of things that you want to classify. You will need to know the amount of the sequence ahead of time.
So I think it could work if it's not a sequence, but for sequences of variable length,
I think it would not work very well because you're-- I mean I'm trying to think of a simple way to explain it,
but it's like you're just training one neural network for each time step, so it's not the way to formulate it.
So how does this work with chunking? So we have our--
do you understand how to this point, at the point right here where the red dot, we can calculate
the gradient of the loss with respect to our final hidden state? So if we can do that, then we can calculate the gradient
of our loss with respect to our second to final hidden state. Because we know our final hidden state
is dependent on our previous hidden state times this weight matrix W.
So we can do this and we can go back and forth until here. And at this point, all we need to save is this final step here.
So what is the gradient of this very final or finals--
maybe over using the word final. But what is the gradient of this initial hidden state
within our truncated batch, with respect to the loss? And then when we're calculating backwards,
we just use that value to calculate all the previous time steps. So that's the overall process.
You're only looking at how the hidden state transforms to form the new hidden state, and that's the only value
that's getting updated here. Yeah, and also how the input changes the hidden state.
So you're looking at two values, both how the input affects it, and how the input affects the next hidden state
and the previous hidden state. Sorry, there's two values, yeah.
So the learning still occurs for all the batches. So you have your loss with respect
to each of your parameters in W here. And then when you're calculating it for the previous time step,
you basically keep this one value. If you change the initial hidden state here,
how does that change the loss? You can calculate that, and then you can see how all the variables feeding into this, namely
this original hidden state and the current time step, how will that affect the variable? But then when you're actually moving to the next chunk over,
you only need to look at how does this hidden state here affect the hidden state on in the next chunk.
So you're looking at this division boundary. The one variable you need to track over is what is the gradient of the hidden state that
occurs after the chunk. And then you can use that to calculate the gradient of the current hidden state, which
is dependent on the input x and the previous. So there's different ways you can formulate it, but you can imagine we just apply
the update to all the weights here and we zero out the memory. The only thing we're tracking is this gradient right here.
So you can apply, you can do gradient apply step where you apply all the gradients to the weights depend on the learning rate and your optimizer and all
this stuff. And then you move on to calculating the next batch. So the reason why this isn't a perfect calculation
is because you're calculating these independently rather than all at once.
So you have three different updates rather than just one update at a time, but it should be--
you still calculating the gradient for each step here. You keep one thing in memory, which
is how does this hidden state-- the first one in the batch.
How can you update the hidden state here to determine the loss? And we throw out all the other ones.
So you have the weights in memory. You can apply the gradient, you do your learning rate multiply
and you apply it to the weights. You'll also see a similar thing if you do distributed learning.
So if you have a gradient calculated on each GPU separately, they will apply them all to the same set of weights
even though they're calculated independently. So I think we have a lecture on distributed learning coming up.
So it's a similar thing where you're not tracking it all in the same memory at the same time, and you're applying it to the weights one at a time.
Yeah, it would be better if you could fit it all in memory. Yeah, it would be better if you could fit it all in memory. I mean, this is mainly--
for this one, it's essentially the same. But in this setting maybe it's more clear how you're explicitly losing information.
So here, you're only looking at some of the outputs at a time.
So it's really clear how we're not looking at the entire set of the losses
when we're calculating, because there's losses at each time step. So you lose information here, but in this case,
you wouldn't lose information. I think one more practical example where we can't fit the whole RNN on the slide
is this idea of a character level language model. And it's really funny because these were shown to be quite effective 10 years ago.
And it's really funny because you can see how the current wave of language models are a build up of this really simple approach of just
predicting characters with RNNs. So usually when you do a model like this,
you will input your characters, and then people call this a one hot encoding where you basically have one--
you have a one in your vector and zeros in every other location. So it's the index here.
You can encode this as the index, and then we can use these as inputs.
And we can calculate our hidden layers based on the previous hidden layer as well as the current input.
And then we have our output layer the same where now we can look at, what is
the output for the corresponding correct value here, which is taken as the next time step.
So we want the output for example to be e, we map it over here we look at--
you can imagine this is something like softmax, and we have the logits, so these are the scores.
2.2, it's lower than 4.1. So yeah, we have-- this is maybe not
so great of an output at this time step, and so on and so forth. So you can really view this as a time step wise classification
problem. And that's exactly what in general, these language models
are doing, is time step wise classification based on softmax.
So at test time, the basic idea is we need to also sample characters one at a time
and just feed it back into the model, so it sees what it generated at the previous time step,
so on and so forth, repeating until we generate the words. So you can actually create RNNs to do this basic language
modeling task by operating at a character level, and it works quite well. One thing to note is that in terms of this input layer,
usually we don't actually input one hot embeddings into the model, and instead we'll have something called an embedding layer where
this is essentially just a giant matrix, which is the dimensions. It's D by D, where D is the number of different inputs
you have to your model. And what you do is you can imagine this as a matrix multiply where we grab the first row,
or in this case, we grab the second row of our embedding matrix based on what our input sample is here.
And we just use this as a matrix multiply. This is incorrect, actually, this one
should be higher probability, yeah. It's Funny, We've had these slides for quite a few years
and I guess no one noticed it. Anyway, so we have E here as our target character.
And so in this case, you're correct that the model is actually getting it wrong, so we will want to penalize it heavy for this time step.
Yeah, that's a good question. Yeah, so one of the nice things about this implementation
is also it's really simple. So it's 112 lines of Python code, and you can train these models on a variety of different tasks.
So this is the pre-LLM era of what you could do. You can train it on sonnets by William Shakespeare.
And as I mentioned, there's a blog post by former instructor of this course, Andrej Karpathy, back in 2015, which talked about how these RNNs are unreasonably
effective at what they do in generating text. Yeah? Could you explain again, why you use an embedding layer?
Yeah, so the basic idea for an embedding layer is that generally it's better to have vectors as input to our models.
And you can learn what these embedding layers are too. So we tend to favor spread out weights in general
when we're trying to learn these. So you can initialize your embedding layer to this very small zero values with something like the Kaiming
initialization, we talked about. And then you're just looking at one row of it at a time as your input vector, rather than it being a number as input, how
you would have to represent that is basically a one with a bunch of zeros and optimization only the embedding
works better.
So yeah, you can do it in 112 lines of python code, which is pretty neat. You can train it on Sonnets by William Shakespeare
and it'll actually output reasonable text. We'll go through some examples. So one of the cool things is you can see as you train the model more, it
becomes more and more coherent. So at the beginning, it's basically just gibberish because it hasn't learned proper values for W.
And then as you train it more and more, it becomes more like the stage III, looks like English, at least some
of the words are there. And then as you train more, it actually starts working really well, which this is I guess was a bit of foreshadowing
for what was to come in the era of AI, which is pretty cool.
You can see full on, it learns things about the style, how you should have someone's name,
and how something that seems fairly plausible as you have it generating more and more,
it starts making less and less sense, but it's pretty cool to see. You can train it on code, like I think in this example,
they trained it on Linux. So there's just the source code for Linux. They trained one of these character level RNNs,
and you can see it generating C code, which looks pretty good. I don't know if this would compile,
but it looks reasonable just looking at it. And this idea has really taken off over the past few years.
So I mean, I'm sure you all know it especially since a lot of you work in computer science or coding or your students
in this area, but there's all of these different programming tools now for these language models
that were essentially trained on a similar task where they consumed a bunch of this training data
that's just existing code, and instead of trying to predict the next character, they're trying to predict the next token, which is a group of characters.
And how they define tokens depends on the model, and there's a lot of details we could get into there. But at a high level, it's a really similar thing,
they're just predicting groups of characters autoregressively one after the next. And it's really seen a blow up in recent years
with all these existing tools. Yeah?
What is the input to the model? Is It like a trigger. Oh, what like for this? Yeah. You could have the input be--
you just-- maybe you start with a random character. Could be one way to do it, but you would need some initial input.
There could be-- usually with language models they have a start token as a predetermined.
This is always what you see at the start of your sequence. So you could do a similar things with RNNs. I don't know in this exact scenario what they did.
Maybe they just did a character, but it's hard to know. So the question is, how does labeling work with language models?
And the neat thing about these pure language models, all they're doing is just predicting the next token.
You don't need to label it, you just need to give it a lot of text. That's why these models are so good, is because they scrape the internet for essentially all
available text, and then they train the model on all of it. So that's why they're so good. It's because it's just generating the next token,
and you don't need to label it. So that's why language models are so good. So the question is, if we're always
taking the maximum probability output at each time step, we always just be generating the same thing over and over again.
And the answer is yes, actually. So if you just took the maximum probability, I guess this example is not so good.
But imagine the probabilities are correct here and you just took the maximum probability at each time step. You would always be getting the same output
given the same input. In practice what people do, is they don't do this is called greedy decoding, you're always picking the maximum probability.
In practice, they sample based on a distribution, the distribution given by the probabilities output by your softmax.
So you won't pick the max probability, you would pick say in this case probability 0.84 for this one,
or probability 0.13 for this other output variable. And then you would run that for each sequence.
And there's a bunch of different ways you can do it too. You can search ahead. It's called beam searching, where you're trying different ones and seeing which
one has the highest overall probability for the sequence. So there's a lot of-- this is a whole active area of research,
how do you sample from these models? But the simple answer is you don't always pick the highest probability.
Yeah, so the question is in the case where we have many to one outputs, are we outputting something each time
or do we have something to look at here? So I think in practice to save compute you wouldn't want to output something that's never used.
But you could feasibly output at each time step. And it might be interesting depending on your problem, to look at that and understand, is the output converging
over the course of training or not? Something like that. So it might be useful to look at, but generally people wouldn't do it just to save compute.
But it could be useful, actually yeah. It could help you understand the way your model works. If there's certain triggers or things that help
it predict the correct answer. Cool, good questions.
So we'll keep on chugging along. We talked about these RNNs, how good they
are at generating characters. We related them to some of these modern coding tools, which are really neat. One of the cool things also about RNNs
is you can look at the activation values, and they'll actually sometimes tell you
interesting things about what the model is tracking. So in our little toy example, we looked at the output activations
, and you would see it's the current value and the previous value. That was what the RNN states or cells were tracking.
What you can also do is give it basically a sequence here. And the models I'll show in these slides,
it's using a tanh activation, so this is from 1 to minus 1, and minus 1 means it's visualized as red here, and very
close to one would be blue. We get the whole spectrum here. And you can look at--
for each character coming in, what is the activation of that cell at that time step? And so that's how their color coding these plots here.
This one's not really showing anything, it's random. A lot of them won't be interpretable. But some of them have pretty cool things that you can track.
For example, this one's a quote detector, so it turns on basically as soon as the quote starts
and it ends when the quote ends. So this is basically something in the RNN tracking, we need to have an end quote at some point.
And when to put it is something the model is trying to figure out, but it's tracking it.
Another cool thing is the line length tracking cell. So it starts very high value.
And then it becomes a very low value as you near where the model thinks there'll be a new line character.
So this is also cool as a way to look at this other value.
And these are, again, just single activations in a layer of this model that we're looking at, and mapping it
to each character. So it's highly interpretable. They have this if statement cell.
So anything within an if statement is being tracked here, which is also pretty cool. And even things like detecting quotes or comments
because it needs to know to output the end of comment character here. So it's something it needs to track.
And so you have this nice interpretable cell as well. And then finally this code depth cell. So as you have nesting in your code,
it activates more and more at each time step, at each not time step, at each step
into the indentation into your code hierarchy. So yeah, this is pretty neat.
You can actually look at the activations and directly map them onto the inputs without needing to do any fancy tricks, which is actually pretty
incredible, if you think about how interpretable some of these hidden states are in the RNN. It's actually somewhat similar to what we were doing where
we were manually assigning it. But the RNN is internally doing a very similar process.
Cool, so I'll talk about now some of the trade offs why you might want to use an RNN, when is it helpful.
So the nice thing is they can process any length of input. So a lot of these modern language models
that rely on transformers have something called a context length or context window, maximum context window.
RNNs don't have this. They can just take a sequence of infinite length, essentially, as long as you can keep running the model on it.
So there's no context length limit. The computation for the time step, t
can, in theory, use information from many steps back if it's captured in the hidden state. So if your model is effectively capturing
all of the dynamics of your input sequence in the hidden state, in theory it can use values from an extremely long time ago.
But in practice, there might be some issues with this, which we'll go into some details there.
Also, the model size does not increase for a longer input. So we had an example where, what if you just
had a different layer for each input time step? You don't have this issue, which is nice.
And then we're applying the same weights at each time step. So basically, we know the update rule
for how we calculate the outputs is the same every single time. So there's some nice symmetry here.
And also, just when you think conceptually about the problem, you're always doing the same thing at every single time step, which is nice conceptually
and also helps with some implementation as well. So what are the main disadvantages?
So you need to compute the previous hidden state to compute the next one every single time.
So this can be slow if you need to. Each hidden state is determined and is conditioned
on all the previous ones, then this recurrence computation can actually end up taking a lot of time.
So although this is not an issue during inference time when you're always-- like for a transformer,
also you have this issue where you need to output the next token or character every single time,
but at training time, it's actually difficult to batch all of these together and during training
because in order to calculate the loss, you need to calculate the previous hidden states.
So this can pose challenges for scaling up to a lot of data. And then in practice, it's actually
difficult to access information many time steps back because we have a fixed size hidden state,
and we're trying to cram all the information into it. So you'll eventually lose some information as your sequence goes longer and longer.
Cool, I'll talk about some applications more specific to computer vision, where RNNs have seen success now.
So one of them is image captioning, which we talked about. So the basic thing here is we mentioned
there's this start token or start character which begins the sequence. And then you will terminate when you have this end character
or end token. In this case, it seems like it's word level tokens. So you could have a model like this.
The most basic way to do it is you essentially have a CNN or something that encodes,
a visual encoder, that encodes the image, and we use that as input to our recurrent neural network
as well as the previous text that was generated. So we have two stages here.
And very more concretely, how would you combine the CNN and RNN? You can imagine you have this test image.
It comes in, so your model's going downwards here, starting at the first layers at the top
and then moving downwards. You can imagine this is something that was trained on ImageNet or something.
And so we're not going to use the class labels, but we're going to use this second to last layer. This is the common strategy we saw
for transfer learning as well, or this getting good visual representations of images.
So we use the second to last layer. And then we can start using this as input to our hidden state.
And now our hidden state is also a function of this Wih value here.
So we don't necessarily have just a hidden state, we're also tracking the visual components here.
But I won't spend too much time on this because this won't be in any of the assignments, but just to give you a flavor of here's
how RNNs were used historically with CNNs, where we're taking a CNN pre-trained on ImageNet, and now we're including this information
into the hidden state as well. So we use the sampling process, either greedy sampling, some other version of sampling to calculate
the tokens at each time step. We end it when we have this end token. Whenever we sample the end token,
that's how we know when to finish. And these models actually worked very well for the time. I think they had a lot of great successes.
So you can see here a lot of nice examples of where the model's outputting very reasonable captions based
on the input image, but also they the models would struggle
in a lot of scenarios too. So a lot of these have to do with the distribution of where
these images are commonly seen in the training data. For example, someone holding something with their hands
cupped like this very much looks how they might hold a mouse. But obviously, we can tell this is a phone because it's
a flat object they're holding, and their hand is facing up, not downwards. So this thing is interesting to see.
Also, I guess they think the woman's holding a cat where she's just wearing some fur clothing.
They see a beach, so they assume there's a surfboard. This type of hallucination, I would say, is still extremely common with vision language models
today, where it'll think there's objects present that are commonly present in a given scene,
but aren't in this particular scene that you're looking at. Also, things like bird being perched in a tree
or throwing a ball, but he's catching a ball. These are all based on the bias in the data set, essentially,
and the model learning that during training, it is most probably true that a certain object
or a certain action is being performed when in the actual image it's not the case. So in the data set, there's high co-occurrence
of these actions or objects with the particular scene. So the model learns to associate them, but it doesn't learn to disentangle.
It's happening in this scene because of the-- in this scene, we know they're not throwing because the glove is here,
and the ball is going into the glove, not on the other hand, but you need to explain it like that. And the way we train these models,
we're training them just to output the caption. So we're not doing any explanation there, and that's why it's part of the reason you
see this co-occurrence issue. So for visual question answering,
this is another really common task where RNNs were used, and there are two formulations for visual question answering
that were commonly used. One is to basically, you say you have a model that is a captioning model,
and you want to see how well it could answer questions. One thing you could do is to give it this question,
and then have it output text and look at the probabilities of each of the answer sequences. So you have a probability for each character or token,
and you could multiply them together to get the probability of the overall answer. This is one way you could use one of these RNN style models
to do question answering. A more common way people did it is they would have basically
a question as input to the model, multiple different answers also as
separate inputs to your model. And then it's outputting essentially a probability per question. So in this case, it would be a four way classifier where
you have four different classes: answer 1, answer 2, answer 3, answer 4, and you're just outputting the probabilities. And a lot of different ways you can formulate it,
but this is a very common task in computer vision where you need to use language and where
sequence modeling helps. Also visual dialogue. At the time, these were all considered very separate tasks.
These days, the tasks you have one model that can do almost all of these, but how can you have a chat about an image?
We've really seen an explosion in the capabilities of these kinds of models in the last two years.
Maybe one other type of model that RNNs were commonly used for is for this visual navigation task.
So you have these images coming in, and you want to output a sequence of directions to move in some 2D floor plan.
How do you get to the target destination? There's another application for you all to be aware of where these sequence models were used.
One thing I want to note that I didn't really explicitly mention
before, but just in the same way where we can have multi-layer CNNs or multi-layer of these dense
or fully connected layers, you can also have multi-layer RNNs. And in practice, most of the RNNs,
I showed were multi-layer RNNs. Now, the main difference is that you treat each layer separately.
So the hidden state of say layer 1, depends on the hidden state of the previous time
step of layer 1. So in this of depth wise dimension--
I'm sorry in the depth dimension, each of these layers,
you're only looking at the hidden states from that layer in the previous time steps. And then in terms of looking at Windows in the time dimension,
instead of-- so the first layer will have the actual input x as the input, but then the second layer will take as input the output y from the previous layer.
So you can stack these up, and it forms this grid, where each layer is operating with regards
to the previous hidden states only within that layer, but then in terms of passing input output that is between layers.
And so you can see to calculate this top right value we need to calculate all of the different values, all
of the different hidden states in this entire computational graph beforehand. So you can get a feel for how as you start training,
this gets to be a very involved process and not very efficient.
OK, I'll talk about one of the key variants for RNNs that was proposed actually a while ago in the 1990s,
but saw a lot of success for quite some time until the transformer revolution called LSTMs.
You won't need to know about the details of how LSTMs operate, but what I hope you learned is that RNNs have
some key disadvantages that LSTMs seek to alleviate, and a lot of the more modern state space
models also try to seek to alleviate some of these same issues that RNNs face.
So we talked about how by default, tanh is a really commonly used activation function.
And we also talked about how you have this Whh matrix that converts your previous hidden state to the new one.
And it's summed with this Wxh matrix that converts your input
vector xt at the current time step into your hidden state dimension and then you sum these together.
You can also formulate this as we have our weights here,
and you're stacking the vectors like this. And so sometimes for shorthand people, we'll just combine both of these W's together to form one big W.
But you should note that these are two blocks that
are diagonally positioned together where there would be like-- if you're formulating like this,
there's a lot of zeros in this W, because Whh is not interacting with xt at all,
but this is a shorthand way to notate it where it makes thinking about it and writing down the math easier.
So you will see all three variants here. This one's maybe the most explicit about where the actual values, the non-zero values,
and the weight matrices lie. And so one way to think of it is you stack these vectors together, which is shown here.
We're multiplying by this W and then we pass it through tanh h. This gives us our output h,t which we pass to the next RNN.
You can imagine these are stacked. And then you may also have either the output directly yt,
or we have this layer where it's a weight matrix times ht with the activation function around it too.
Yeah, question. Oh sure. So here we have multilayer RNNs, how is the [INAUDIBLE] matrix
pretty much [INAUDIBLE]? Yeah so the weights are shared within the layers for multi-layer RNN. So all of these hidden state updates
will use the same weights. And then each layer, which you stack it vertically in this diagram, each layer will have a separate set of weights.
OK, yeah, so this is the way that it works.
And then when you have backpropagation, we talked about. If you don't have a loss for each time step,
why you need to only calculate your loss based on what the losses of your output h,t, and so when you do this
backpropagation, you're multiplying by W, and then you're also taking the derivative of tanh.
And both of these can actually have some issues. So when specifically mathematically
looking at what is the gradient of how-- if we change each component of our hidden state t,
with respect to h,t minus 1. Sorry, if we change each component of h,t minus 1, how will that affect h,t?
This is what this gradient is calculating. We need the derivative of tanh because this is our activation function.
And then we have Whh which is the multiply here for converting the previous hidden state to the next one.
So this is actually how we calculate the gradient. And here we can run into issues. So if we're calculating the loss at each time step,
and we have lost here the total loss we just summit for each of the weights.
So the total loss is just the sum of the loss at each time step with respect to this reused W matrix.
And so you end up getting this product of these dl--
to calculate the loss of L-- at the final step L,t with respect
to h,t, you need to calculate each of the intermediate hidden states and how that affects W in order to calculate this final
loss here by using the chain rule. We mentioned example here, and just to point out why this is an issue.
If we look at these individual terms, so if we hone in on this aspect of how does changing the current hidden state change the next one, which
is the majority of these calculations contained in this product term here, we get
that it's the same thing we mentioned earlier where you have this derivative of tanh multiplied by your Whh.
And so why is this an issue? Well, first of all, this is the derivative of tanh plotted here.
The maximum value is 1, and so almost always you're getting less than 1.
So you can have vanishing gradients from this term here. But even if we assume there's no non-linearity or we
pick some other activation function that doesn't have this issue. If we look at this weight matrix here,
that we're multiplying at each time step, either we're going to have a large singular value,
so this will be as the vectors are coming in, what is the maximum they'll be stretched?
If it's say a unit vector singular value is telling you what's the maximum that a unit vector could
be stretched by the matrix? So if it's very large you can have these gradients explode or if it's very small, you can have this vanishing gradients
issue. And if you have exploding gradients, we have a fix which is this scaling the gradient.
So you can just divide or clip it and somehow so that you don't-- so too big of a gradient, it's not too much of an issue.
But this really small vanishing gradient issue is actually the main issue with why people don't just
use really long RNNs in practice because of tanh, and because under many scenarios,
your weight matrix has this property where it's either expanding your activations or reducing them.
So yeah, I think these are the main reasons why it motivated a change in RNN architectures, and why a lot of the reasons why
people don't use RNNs. This is one of the main issues. So how do you resolve this.
So the way that people did it was this creation of the LSTM. And the high level idea, which I won't go into too many details
because it's actually quite complicated is that you have four of these different gates that
are tracking different values, that instead of just having one hidden state, you have multiple of these values.
You precompute to determine how to change your hidden state, and then also what information to pass through a different pathway.
So you have the regular hidden state pathway. You have a different pathway where it's easier to pass information.
And this is the basic idea, at a high level they call it a gate
or what are you actually writing to the hidden state of the cell. The input gate, which is deciding whether or not you
write information to the cell. The forget gate, how much to forget from previous time steps, as well as the output gate, which is how much
are you actually outputting for your hidden state. So you can see, this is really involved, a lot of design choices here.
and they put it all together into this, I would say, fairly complicated diagram, but the basic idea
is this part is the same where we're doing this weight multiply. But now we have four different values we're computing instead
of just the h,t. We have the input gate, and the gate
to determine how much to write here, and we have our output that's passed to the next hidden state.
You can think of this top section here as a highway where the goal is to not have any activation functions.
So no tanh. So we avoid the issues we had where tanh made the gradients vanish, and all we're applying
is this forget gate. So as long as we're not basically forgetting all the information at each time step,
we're able to pass information more easily. This is the high level explanation. And then more importantly, in practice,
people seem to see that this worked very well. Again, you won't be implementing this for the course at all,
but I think this is a really commonly used baseline still and some deep learning papers.
So it's good to know about. But I think you can think of this through the lens of people are trying to construct these things to make up
for all the issues that RNNs had, which is vanishing gradients and also the lack of information
being captured. You need to cram everything into this hidden state. So you have really long term dependencies. Those are lost.
So they created a separate pathway to pass over this more long term information through the top
here. So do LSTMs solve the vanishing gradient problem completely?
It definitely helps. So it makes the RNN easier to preserve this information over many time steps by using this top pathway diagram.
So it's in contrast-- it's much harder for Vanilla RNNs
to learn our current weight matrix that preserves info in the hidden state across every single time step,
if we're always doing the same operation, and we're not able to just pass information directly without an activation function.
So it doesn't guarantee it, but it makes it significantly easier and it helps improve learning long term dependencies and works
very well empirically. So people generally don't train RNNs so much, and more often
train LSTMs, if you were going to go with this recurrent modeling route, but I think in general,
these are also-- I was saying, I would say significantly fallen out of fashion, but it gives you a sense of the way that people have tried to design RNNs to account
for the issues they face. So one other thing that would be cool to tie-in to something
you learned earlier in this course, is this idea of directly adding outputs and skipping some activation functions or other layers
is actually highly related to the idea that we discussed in ResNets, where you have these skip connections, where the value is just
copied over and added later in the layer block. So you have multiple in ResNets.
You have multiple of these convolution layers stacked together, and then you add skip connections where the value just
gets added here. And you can think of this in a similar light for LSTMs, how it's skipping over some of these layers
and it helps improve as you get in this case, instead of very large depth of the model.
It's very long sequences of time steps. So this is parallel, but it's a little different
because one is the number of layers and the other is the number of time steps.
OK, I think the final slide for today's lecture is just a little tie-in for how these RNNs have made
a bit of a resurgence in the last year or two, which is funny, because I think if we taught the course maybe
a year or two ago, I would have been much more willing to want to cut RNNs entirely. But there are actually a lot of nice advantages they have.
So the main one is this unlimited context length. So one of the main issues with transformers
is they have a limited context length, as people are really pushing the boundaries for what these models are capable of.
This context length is becoming more and more of an issue. So there have been various workarounds in the transformer space.
People do things like rope and some other techniques to try to extend the context length, but it's a pretty significant limitation of the model.
The other thing is that during inference for RNNs, the compute scales linearly with the sequence length
or during training to, but basically, as you add more and more steps to your sequence,
you just need to recompute the same operation over and over again. So there's no operation that looks across the entire input
sequence like you have for transformers. So these are really big advantages, and there have been a couple of papers.
So to shout out a few, there's this RWKV model. You can check out arXiv link here,
and also Mamba are both mainly highlighting this idea of we're able to achieve linear time sequence
modeling. So as you scale up your input sequence, the compute also scales linearly as opposed to quadratically
with transformers. And so it's better for long context problems sometimes.
In terms of compute it works better, and it has these main advantages. So people try to get the best of both worlds,
and there's been a lot of research in this area. How can you get the performance of transformers with the scaling of RNNs?
OK, so that's all for today in class. We basically talked about how, there's a lot of different ways
you can design architectures with RNNs. Vanilla RNNs are simple, but they don't work that well.
And there's been more complex variants that people have proposed that introduce ways to selectively pass information.
This backward flow of gradients in RNNs can either explode or vanish, depending on the activation function you use, or what is the properties of your weight
matrix. So you often need this back propagation through time to actually compute the gradient as well.
And then finally, basically these better architectures are a hot topic of research right now, as well
as just generally new paradigms for reasoning over sequences. So yeah, I think that's it for today. Next time we'll talk about attention and transformers.

All right, welcome back, everyone, to lecture eight.
Today, we're going to talk about attention and transformers. And I think this is a really fun one. So as a quick recap, last time, we
were talking about recurrent neural networks. And recurrent neural networks were this new neural network architecture meant for processing sequences.
And in particular, we saw how neural networks, by processing sequences, let us attack a whole new different kinds of problems
than we could with convolutional networks before. So in particular, usually, we had been thinking about these one-to-one problems, where
you input one thing like an image and then output one thing like a classification for what's in that image.
But once you have the ability to move beyond images and move towards sequences of data, it let us tackle a lot of new kinds of problems,
like one to many problems, image captioning. Maybe we want to input an image, output a textual description of that image, which is going to be a sequence of words, maybe
many to one, where we do input a sequence of frames and output a classification for those frames,
and a bunch of other problems along this vein. So now, we're seeing that moving into these more sophisticated
neural network architectures, both is more interesting, architecturally, but also lets us tackle new problems
than we could with more traditional feedforward neural networks. So today, we're going to build on that
and talk about two new things in today's lecture. The first thing is going to be attention, which is going to be a brand new neural network
primitive that fundamentally operates on sets of vectors. And then the second thing we're going to talk about
is the transformer. And the transformer is a different neural network architecture that has self-attention at its core.
And the spoiler alert is that transformers are basically the architecture that we use for almost all problems
in deep learning today. So any of the largest applications that you're seeing out there in the wild today,
whether it's classifying images, generating images, generating text, classifying text, working with audio, basically,
any kind of large neural network today that is large, state of the art, trained in a lot of data, deployed
by a big company, almost all of them are going to be transformers today. So that's really exciting that we to get you up
to speed on the latest and greatest architectures that people are using now. But even though transformers are this state of the art
architecture that everyone is using for everything today, they have a relatively long history.
And they initially-- it's interesting watching these fields develop. Because looking back on it, when the moment that transformers
came out, it feels like it ought to have been this big moment, this big thing when there was a big sea change, this new architecture,
this new thing. But it actually didn't feel that way. Because even though there was one moment where the transformer
architecture was born, these ideas around self-attention, around using attention in various ways,
those had actually been around in the field for several years at that time. And in particular, these ideas around attention self-attention,
they actually developed out of recurrent neural networks. So we're going to start there to talk about and motivate these problems.
So this is going to be a little bit mirroring the historical development of these ideas.
So for that reason, we're actually going to-- in order to introduce transformers, we're actually going to roll back and recap a little bit
about this idea of recurrent neural networks that we saw in the last lecture. So as a motivating problem, let's think about this sequence
to sequence problem of translation. So we want to input one sequence, which is going to be a sequence of words in English.
Then we want to output another sequence, which is going to be a sequence of words in a different language, Italian
And we can't make assumptions that there's any correspondence between those words. The number of words in the English sentence
might be different from the number of words in the Italian sentence. And the order of those words might be totally different.
So this is a perfect application of the kind of sequence processing algorithms that we-- sequence processing architectures that we saw
in recurrent neural networks. And indeed, this idea of processing these sequence to sequence problems with recurrent neural networks, this
goes all the way back to 2014, even a bit earlier than that. But people have been processing sequences
with recurrent neural networks for more than a decade at this point. So the basic architecture for processing sequence
to sequence problems with recurrent neural networks is that, typically, you'll start with one encoder. Your encoder is a recurrent neural network.
The recurrent neural network recall is this function that gets applied recursively on two inputs.
One is your xt, your input at the current time step. And the other is your ht minus 1, which is your hidden state at the previous time step.
And your recurrent neural network unit will then spit out a next hidden unit-- a next hidden state at the next time step.
And then we can apply that same recurrent neural network unit over in time to process a sequence
of potentially variable length. So in this case, we're using a recurrent neural network encoder that inputs the input sequence in English.
Input sequence-- you got to use relatively short sentences to fit on slides and still have all the boxes show up.
So we're using a kind of short, silly sentence, "We see the sky." And this each word in that sentence
gets processed via one tick of the recurrent neural network. And then the idea of this encoder recurrent neural network
is it wants to process all of the words in the input sequence and somehow summarize the content of that input sentence
so that we can translate it into a different-- into our output target language. So the more concrete way that this happens
is that after processing all the words in the input sequence, we are going to summarize the entire content of that input
sequence into a single vector called the context vector. And there's a couple of different ways
that people would typically do these in recurrent neural networks. I don't think the details are too interesting. So you can just think that context vector is basically
the last hidden state of the encoder recurrent neural network. And now, the idea is that because
of the recurrent structure of recurrent neural networks, the last hidden state incorporates information of the entire input sequence.
So we can think of that last hidden state as summarizing, or encoding all of the information in the entire input sequence.
So then that is one vector that is going to summarize that entire input sequence to do whatever
we want with it. And in this case, what we want to do with it is translate that input sequence
into an output sequence in a different language. So to do that, we're going to use a second recurrent neural network, called the decoder, which usually
has the same architecture but, potentially, a different weight matrix, different set of learned parameters.
And this decoder, gu, is going to be a different recurrent neural network with different learnable weights, u, but has the same basic idea.
Now, if our recurrent neural network unit is going to take three inputs at every time step,
it's going to take yt minus 1, which is the token in the output sequence at the previous time step.
It's going to take st minus 1, which is the previous hidden state in the output sequence, and C,
which is that context vector summarizing the entire input sequence. And then we unroll that output sequence
just as we saw in the last lecture and produce words one at a time in the output sequence. And I don't speak Italian, so I'm not
going to try I'm not going to try to pronounce these. But there's some Italian words on the screen that you can see.
And I'm assuming that, that indeed translates to "We see the sky."
Hopefully, that's correct. But the idea is we're going to tick this recurrent neural network one tick at a time.
It's going to output words one at a time. And this is basically a summary of what we saw last lecture. So this should this should, basically,
not be too surprising in light of the previous lecture. But there's a potential problem here.
And there's a communication bottleneck here between the input sequence and the output sequence.
The only way in which the input sequence is communicating with the output sequence is via that context vector C.
And that C is going to be a fixed length vector because the size of that vector is fixed when we set the size of our recurrent neural network.
And maybe that's fine. So C might be a fixed length vector of like 128 floats,
1,024 floats. But the size of that input vector is not going to change, as our input and output sequence sizes grow or shrink.
And that's a potential problem. So if we're doing short sequences, like we see the sky, maybe it seems pretty plausible that we can summarize everything
we need to know about that sequence in that fixed vector of 120-- the 1,024 floats.
But what if we're not trying to translate four words? What if we're trying to translate a whole paragraph, or a whole book,
or an entire corpus of data? Then in that case, we're going to run into a bottleneck, where,
at some point, as we scale that input sequence, it's just not going to be sensible to ask the network
to summarize the entire input sequence into a single fixed length vector. So that's going to be a problem.
So the solution here is, actually, let's not bottleneck the network through one fixed length vector.
Instead, let's change the architecture of our recurrent neural network. Intuitively, what we want to do is not force a bottleneck
in a fixed length vector between the input and the output. Instead, as we process the output sequence,
we're going to give the model the ability to look back at the input sequence. And now, every time it produces an output vector,
we want to give the network the opportunity to look back at the entire input sequence. And if we do this, there's going to be no bottleneck.
It will scale to much longer sequences. And hopefully, the model architecture will work much better. So that's the motivating idea that
led to attention and transformers and all this great stuff that we see today. It all came-- one way of telling the story
is that it all came from trying to solve this bottleneck problem in recurrent neural networks. So let's see how we can actually implement this intuition
and endow a recurrent neural network with the ability to look back at the input sequence on every time step.
So here, we're going to start with the same thing. Our encoder neural network is going to remain the same, no changes there.
We still need to set some initial hidden state for the output sequence.
And so we need to set some initial decoder state, s0, in some way. But now, once we have that decoder hidden state,
what we're going to do is look back at the input sequence. So the way that we're going to do that is by computing some alignment scores by comparing
that, basically, compute a scalar value for each step in the input sequence that says,
how much does that initial decoder state s0, how much does that decoder state match each token
of the input sequence? So in this case, there were four tokens in the input sequence. So we want to compute four alignment scores, each of which
is just a single number that says, what is the similarity between the input sequence,
the token of the input sequence, and this initial decoder state s0?
Now, there's a lot of ways that we could implement alignment scores. But a simple way is just use a simple linear layer
that we're calling f sub att. And so that linear layer is going to input-- is going to concatenate the decoder hidden state, s,
with one of the encoder hidden states, h, concatenate those two into a vector, and then apply a linear transform that squashes that
down into a scalar. And that's just a linear operator that can be put into a computational graph and learned jointly via gradient descent, just in the way
that we learn all other parameters of a network. So now at this point, we've got this scalar alignment score
for each step in the input sequence. And now, we want to apply a softmax function.
These scalar alignment scores are totally unbounded. They're arbitrary real values from minus infinity to infinity.
We want to put some structure on this to prevent things from blowing up. So one way that we do this is apply a softmax function.
So we've got four scalar values telling us the alignment of that decoder hidden state with each of the encoder hidden states.
Now, we apply a softmax over those four values to give us a distribution over those four values.
So remember, the softmax function that we saw a few lectures ago is going to take a vector of arbitrary scores
and convert it into a probability distribution. Which means it'll have the property that each entry in the output softmax probabilities
will be between 0 and 1, and they will sum to 1. So we can think of-- so whenever we
have whenever we run a vector through a softmax, we can think of the thing we get out as a probability distribution, or rather,
a discrete probability distribution over those input scores. So in this case-- so at this point, after we take those alignment scores
and run them through a softmax, what we've essentially done is predicted a distribution over the input
tokens, given that decoder hidden state. So now, what we want to do is take that distribution
over the input tokens and use them to compute a vector summarizing the information in the encoder.
So the way that we do that is we take our attention scores, which recall, are these numbers a11, a12, a13, a14,
they're all between 0 and 1. They sum to 1. We're going to take a linear combination now of the encoder hidden states, h1, h2, h3, h4
and take a linear combination of those encoder hidden states weighted by our attention scores.
And this will give us a context vector that we're calling c1 here in purple, which
is going to summarize the information in the encoder sequence in some way that's modulated by those attention
weights. And now, at this point, so then this c1 is basically some linear combination of the input encoder states, h1 to h4.
Things look basically the same, as they did in the non-attention case. So we have our context vector.
We concatenate it with our first token of the output sequence, y0, pass that to our recurrent unit to get both--
to get our next hidden state of the decoder recurrent neural network, as well as the first output token from the decoder
recurrent neural network. So basically, the structure of that decoder RNN
did not really change. All we did is rather than set, we computed the context vector in a different way using this attention linear combination
mechanism. But now, crucially, so the intuition here
is that this context vector basically attends, or looks at different parts of the input sequence that
is modulated by whatever the output RNN wants to look at, at this moment in time.
So for example, part of the input-- as part of the input sequence has this token, these two words
we see. So then in trying to produce that one word in Italian that corresponds to we see, the network probably
wants to go back and look at those two words in the input sequence in order to know what output word to produce.
So we might expect-- we might want to have some-- we might expect that, intuitively,
when trying to produce the word, "vediamo," then the network will want to look back at the words we see
and put higher attention weights on those. And it doesn't really care about the sky because those words are not necessary for producing
that vediamo output. And that's the kind of intuition. We're giving the network, the ability to look back at the relevant parts of the input
sequence for the word that it's trying to predict at this moment in time. And the other thing to keep in mind
is that this is all differentiable. We don't need to supervise the network. We don't need to tell it which words in the input sequence
were required for each word in the output. Instead, this is just a big computational graph composed of differentiable operations.
All of this can be learned end-to-end via gradient descent. So at the end of the day, we're still going to have this cross-entropy softmax loss, where
the network is trying to predict the tokens of the output sequence. And in the process of trying to predict
the right tokens in the output sequence, it's going to learn for itself how to attend to different parts of the input sequence.
So that's really critical. If we had to go in and supervise and tell the network the alignment between the two, it
would be very difficult to get training data for this kind of thing. The question is, how do we initialize the decoder?
We're actually using the word-- you got to be careful, we're using the word "initialize" a little bit overloaded here.
So one question is, the decoder is itself a neural network that has weights. When we start training that network,
we need to initialize those weights in some way. So then we will typically initialize the weights of the decoder randomly and then optimize them
via gradient descent, just as we do with any other neural network weights. But there's a second notion of initialize.
Which is that when the network is processing a sequence, whatever its current value of the weights are,
we need some way to set that initial hidden state at the time we start processing an output sequence.
And in that case, we need some rule, or some way to set that initial hidden state of the decoder output sequence.
There's a couple of different mechanisms for this. Sometimes, you might initialize it as the last hidden state of the encoder
is one thing you'll sometimes do. You might have a linear transform that projects-- has some learned projection from the last decoder state
to the first-- from the last encoder state to the first decoder state. Or sometimes, people even initialize
the first hidden state of the decoder to be all zeros. Any of those will work, as long as you train the network
to expect that kind of input. So the question is, negations and XORs, will this cause a problem? Maybe.
This is a hard problem. But then you need a lot of data, a lot of flops to try to hope the network can disentangle this.
But basically, recurrent unit takes three things as input. It takes in the decoder.
It takes the previous hidden state, the previous decoder hidden state. It takes the current context vector. And it takes the current token in the output sequence.
And then from that, we produce the next hidden state. And then from the next hidden state, then we go and predict the output token.
So that's actually the same setup as in the non-attention case. I guess there's an implicit connection
from-- there's a connection from s0 to s1 that we're not drawing. Well, so there should have been another arrow from s0 to s1.
I think I just dropped the s0 arrow, so sorry about that. Well, we're basically letting the network
decide for itself to look back at any part of the input sequence that it thinks might be relevant for the task at hand.
But the reason why we think that this mechanism is plausible and might be helpful for the network is because we know that in a language task,
there often is some kind of correspondence between words in the output and words in the input. And we want to let the network look back and pick out
which are the relevant bits of the input for producing this bit of the output. But again, we're not directly supervising it.
We're not telling it how to use these attention scores. But the intuition is that we think that's a plausible thing that it might choose to do,
given this mechanism. OK, so that's one tick of the output.
And now, basically, we do it again. We do this whole process again for every time we tick the decoder RNN.
Remember, the problem we were trying to solve is that, previously, the decoder was bottlenecking through a single vector.
Now, we're going to compute-- instead of bottlenecking through a single vector, we're going to repeat this whole process again and compute
a new context vector for the second time step of the decoder and let it go back and look at the whole input sequence
yet again. So now, basically, given our s1, which is our computed first hidden state in the decoder,
we're going to go back. You take s1, go back and compute comparison, and use our attention mechanism to compute
similarity scores between s1 and all of the hidden states in the encoder. That will compute our similarity scores,
using that exact same FATT, that same linear projection that we used at the first time step, compute these alignment scores,
again, cram them through softmax to get a new distribution over the input sequence for the second decoder time step,
and now compute a new linear combination of the encoder hidden states, now weighted by this new distribution that we computed at the second time
step. And this will basically give us a new context vector, c2,
that now is a different summarization of the input sequence that's now computed as a new linear combination
of the input encoder hidden states. And then the whole thing iterates.
We have a new context vector. We use that to run another tick of our decoder RNN unit
that will now does include that mysterious missing arrow that wasn't there on the previous time step.
So then given our new context vector, given the next token of the output sequence, and given the s1 hidden state of the decoder,
we compute a new decoder state, s2, and then from that, compute another token of the output sequence.
And again. Remember, in this case, it's producing il, which maybe is "the" according to the slide.
I hope that's true. And then in this case, there's maybe a one-to-one correspondence between the word
the network is trying to produce for this sequence and one of the words in the output-- and one of the words in the input.
So we might expect that the network should put relatively high attention weight on just one of the words in the input sequence
and relatively low attention weight on all the other words, in the input sequence. But again, we don't supervise this. The network is deciding for itself
how to make use of this mechanism, all driven by gradient descent on our training task. And this whole thing is we're just
going to repeat that whole process for every tick of the decoder RNN. So now, this basically solved our problem.
We are no longer bottlenecking the input sequence through a single fixed length vector. Instead, we have this new mechanism,
where at every time step of the decoder, the network looks back at the entire input sequence, re-summarizes the input sequence to generate a new context
vector on the fly for this one time step of the decoder, and then uses that to produce the outputs. So this is a pretty cool mechanism.
And this is called attention because the network is attending, or looking at different parts of the input
sequence at every moment in its output. So we talked about these attention weights.
And we said that they were driven-- the network was learning for itself, how to set these attention weights based on its training
data, based on its training task. And another really cool thing about attention is it also gives us a way to introspect and see
what the network is looking at, as it's trying to solve this problem. So we never told it what the alignment
was between the input sequence and the output sequence. But by looking at the attention weights that the network predicts when trying to solve this task,
we get a sense of what the network was looking at, while trying to solve the problem. So that gives us a way to interpret
the processing of the neural network in some way. And so one thing that we can do is then go and look at,
in the process of producing a particular-- processing a particular sequence, what were the attention
weights that the network predicted when trying to do this task? And we can visualize these in a two-dimensional grid.
So here, we're looking at an example of English to French translation.
And across the top, we have our input sequence. The agreement on the European Economic Area
was signed in August 1992. And then running down the rows is the output sequence,
which is in French, which I will not attempt to pronounce. But you can see that, basically, through this attention
mechanism, for every-- remember, the way this attention mechanism worked is that each time the network produced one of these words
in the output sequence, it predicted a probability distribution over the entire input sequence.
So we visualize that in that first row. So if you look at the first row of this matrix, we're visualizing that predicted probability distribution
over the entire input English sentence. And we see that when trying to predict that first word, "le"
of the French sentence, then it puts a lot of probability mass on the English word "the" and basically no probability mass
on any of the other words. Then, when predicting the second word of the output sequence, remember, it goes back and predicts a new distribution
over the entire input sequence. And that's going to be the second row in this matrix. So you can see that a chord, it puts
a lot of probability mass on agreement and then no probability mass anywhere else. So then that gives us some sense that the network actually
did figure out the alignment between the input words and the output words when doing this translation task.
And there's some interesting patterns here that pop up. When we look-- when we see diagonal structures
in this attention matrix, that means that there was a one-to-one correspondence between words in order between the input sequence and the output
sequence. So in particular, we see that the agreement on "the," the first four words of the input sequence,
correspond to this diagonal structure in the attention matrix. So that means that the network has decided for itself
that these first four words of the input sequence align, or match up, or correspond to the first four
words of the input sequence, and the same thing for the last several words. So again, we see this diagonal structure
at the end of the sequence, which means that August 1992, or in August 1992 corresponds to these last couple
words in the French sequence. And again, there's this one-to-one correspondence between words in the output and words in the input.
But we see some other interesting stuff in the middle here. So in the middle, we see European economic area.
But in the French, we see words that look kind of like those in a slightly different order.
Good question, how does it figure out the grammar? That's the mystery of deep learning. But basically, we told that-- we didn't tell the network anything
about grammar. We told the network-- we supervised it with a lot of input, output pairs. We told it, here's an input sequence in English.
Here's an output sequence in French. Here's a mechanism for processing this and learn via gradient descent to set
the weights of this architecture in order to produce this output from this input. We'd never told it anything about grammar.
But it kind of-- because we, as human designers, have this intuition that maybe it makes sense that there ought to be some correspondence between some
of the words, so we bake in a mechanism that we think, as human designers, might be helpful for solving this problem.
And the network figures out for itself, in the process of doing the end-to-end task, how to make use of that mechanism to solve the problem we set for it.
And it's pretty amazing that it works. But in this case, it figured out some of the grammar for itself.
So it sees that we see this non-diagonal, sort of backward diagonal in the attention matrix here. And that means that the network figured out
for itself, this different word order between words in English and words in French.
Or in the middle, you see there's a little two by two grid here. And that corresponds to a situation, where there might not
have been a one-to-one correspondence between the English words and the French words. There might have been two French words that corresponded
to two English words and they didn't perfectly disentangle perfectly. I mean, the network just all figures out this for itself
over the process of training on a lot of data and putting a lot of compute through this. And that's pretty cool.
OK, so there's actually-- and this actually was the initial usage of attention
in machine learning. It actually came from these machine translation problems. So this was from a paper back in 2015,
'Neural Machine Translation' by jointly alerting to align and translate.
And this paper actually just won the runner up test of Time Award at ICLR 2025. So that's pretty cool.
This has been a really impactful paper over time. But it turns out that there's actually a more general idea here and a more general operator hiding
here. We approach this problem from the perspective of trying to fix our recurrent neural networks.
But it turns out the mechanism that we used to fix the recurrent neural networks actually is something general and interesting
and really powerful in its own right. So now, we want to try to pull that out, pull out this idea of attention, and divorce the idea of attention
from the recurrent neural networks. And it turns out that attention will be a very useful and powerful computational
primitive for neural networks in its own right, even if then we can cut away the recurrent neural network part
and just be left with attention as the core primitive in our architecture. And that's where we're going towards.
So now, what we want to do is take this idea of attention, as we saw it, in recurrent neural networks, and try to generalize it and try to carve out
this independent operator that can be used on its own. So let's think about what this attention mechanism was doing.
Basically, what this attention mechanism did is there were a bunch of query vectors. These are-- well, maybe it makes sense
to talk about these in the other order. So there's data vectors, which are like data that we want to summarize.
These are the encoder states of the encoder RNN. So we have this input sequence.
And we've summarized that into a sequence of vectors. And the sequence of vectors is data that we think is relevant for the problem
that we're trying to solve. And now in the process of trying to make use of that data, we want to produce a bunch of outputs.
And for each output, we have a query vector. A query vector is a vector that we're trying to use to solve an--
to produce some piece of output. And in this case, the query vectors are the hidden states of the decoder RNN.
And we have this property, that for each query vector, we want to go back, look at the data vectors,
and summarize the information in the data vectors into a context vector for each--
well, OK, from the purpose of attention, this gets a little bit weird. So the output of the attention operator
are the context vectors that we just talked about for the RNN. So if we're thinking about just, what does that attention operator do, the output
of the attention operator were the context vectors that we feed into the RNN. So then what is the attention operator doing?
The attention operator is taking a query vector going back to the input data vectors, summarizing the data
vectors in some new way to produce an output vector. And that's what the attention operator is doing.
Does that make sense as a generalization of this attention mechanism that we just saw?
[INAUDIBLE] Yeah, I'll repeat it again because it's tricky. There's a lot of stuff flying around here, a lot of boxes.
And we're changing the words that we're using to define the boxes. So I get it, there's a lot happening. So what the attention operator is doing
is there's a bunch of data vectors, which are the encoder hidden states. Then we have a bunch of query vectors,
which are the things we're trying to produce output for. Now, in the process of processing a query vector,
we're going to go back to the data vectors, summarize the data vectors in a new custom way for each query vector, and that will produce an output
vector, which is the context to be fed into the next tick of the RNN. So our query vectors are these guys in green.
For each query vector, we go back to the data vectors, summarize the data vectors, and then produce a new output vector, which is one of the contexts
that we then feed into the rest of the network. So this is tricky because we're trying to go into this architecture and carefully cut out the attention
part and cut it out from the RNN. So then we're going to try to walk through this again
from the perspective of just the attention operator. So from the perspective of just the attention operator,
we're going to start with just one query vector at first, which is one of the states in our RNN.
We also have a bunch of data vectors, which are the encoder hidden states in the RNN.
Now, the computation that we want to perform is, first, compute similarities between that query vector
and all of the data vectors. This is the exact same thing that we just saw, just written in a different way. So we use this FATT function to compute the similarity scores
to compute similarities between each data vector and our one query vector.
Then once we have those similarities, we're going to squash them through a softmax to get attention weights. And this will be a distribution over the data vectors
that has been computed on the fly for this one query vector. Then we want to do is produce an output vector.
This output vector is a linear combination of our data vectors, where those linear combination weights are the attention scores
that we just computed. So this is the output of the attention layer. And then in the context of the larger RNN that we saw,
the output of the attention layer, or the attention operator will become an input to the next tick of the decoder RNN.
But we're trying to deprecate the RNN, so we don't want to talk about that. We just want to talk about the attention and focus on the computation happening inside the attention
layer. So this is basically the operator that we saw in the RNN.
We have this one-- we did this process over and over again of taking a query vector, using
it to compute similarity scores, getting attention weights, getting an output vector. Then we got a new query vector.
Where did that query vector come from? Attention operator doesn't care. Get a new query vector, go back, summarize the data vectors,
get a new output vector. And that's the core of the attention operator. So now, let's try to generalize this
and make it even more powerful computational primitive. Yeah, so in principle, this FATT doesn't
have to be-- it could be any function. It could be any function of two vectors that outputs a scalar in principle. But in practice, we're actually going
to make it simpler in a couple of slides. But in principle, yeah, you could just slot in any function
that you wanted there. OK, so the first generalization that we're going to do
is, actually, the opposite of what you just suggested and make that similarity function simpler.
So we said in principle, it can be any function that takes two vectors and gives a similarity score. What's the simplest possible function that inputs two vectors
and gives us a scalar similarity score? It's a dot product. So we want to try to make things simpler
and also generalize at the same time. And it turns out that a dot product is good enough of a similarity score to be used for this purpose.
So the first thing we're going to do is, actually, just only use dot products to compute similarity.
But it turns out, there's a slight problem with dot products. And this one's subtle because there's
a weird interaction between the dot product and the softmax. And that has to do with what happens
when the dimension of those vectors scales up or down. So if you have--
the motivating example is that if you scale the dimension of that vector, say, we had a constant vector of all 1's
of like dimension 10 versus a constant vector of all 1's of dimension 100, then as we go to the higher
dimensional vector, then when we compute the sum inside that softmax, then we're going to be dividing by a larger number.
So we'll end up with more squashed probability scores, as we go to higher dimensional vectors.
That can lead to vanishing gradients, as we just saw in the previous lecture and prevent learning of this whole thing.
So as a slight hack to prevent that and make this architecture
more generalizable scalable up and down to different dimension vectors, what we're going to do is actually not use the pure dot product
but scale the dot product down by the square root of the dimension of those vectors that we're looking at.
And this is just a way to prevent vanishing gradients and give nicer gradient flow through the softmax for a wider
range of dimensions of vectors. And this turns out to be very important because, as we make these networks bigger and bigger
and bigger over time, we want to get higher dimensional vectors because that gives us more compute, more capacity. So we always want to think about how our architectures will
scale, as we make the parts of those architectures get bigger and bigger and bigger. So this scaled dot product is actually
really important for preventing vanishing gradients here. Yeah, question was, we're limited to data and query vectors of the same size, but we'll actually fix that.
So our first generalization was to use, actually, scaled dot product similarity as our similarity measure.
So now, if we go back and look at the shapes of these things, we have one query vector of dimension Dq. We have data vectors of dimension
Nx by Dq as well because it's a dot product they need to match. But there's actually-- a next generalization
that we're going to do is have multiple query vectors. Maybe we don't want to process just one query vector at a time,
we want to have the ability to process a whole set of query vectors all at once. And this happens in the RNN.
We did end up with a bunch of query vectors. And it's useful for the attention operator to be able to process, not one query vector at a time,
but basically process a set of query vectors all in parallel, and perform the exact same computation in parallel
for a whole set of query vectors. So in this case, we've now generalized it to have N. So Q is now a matrix of shape Nq by Dq.
So we have Nq query vectors. Each of those query vectors has dimension Dq. We have our data vectors is a matrix of size Nx by Dq.
And now, the computation changes a little bit because now, when we compute these alignment scores, when
we compute these similarities, basically, we want to compute all pairs of similarities between all
of the input data vectors and all of the input query vectors. And each one of those similarities
is a dot product, or a scaled dot product. So what's a very efficient and easy and natural
way for us to compute dot products between two sets of input vectors? That turns out to be a matrix multiply.
Because remember, when you do a matrix, multiply, each entry in the output matrix is the inner product of one
of the columns of one of your matrices and the rows of your other matrix. And that's what-- so then each entry in the output of a matrix
multiply is exactly the dot product between the rows and the columns in the output. So by computing a matrix multiply
between our query vectors Q and our data vectors X and you need to get a transpose in there
to make the rows and columns match up in the right way, this basically gives us-- lets us compute all the similarities between all
the data vectors and all the query vectors all in one simple matrix multiply.
Now, we still need to compute these attention weights. Remember, the attention weights, we want to compute for each query vector.
We want to compute a distribution over the data vectors. Well, we already have these-- now, our similarity scores are not just
a single vector of scores, they're now a matrix of scores giving all the similarities. But we still want to compute a distribution over the data
vectors for each query vector independently. So now, we need to compute the softmax over just one of the axes of that matrix of similarity
scores. So this is basically the exact same computation that we just saw. We're just doing it in parallel for a set of query vectors
all at once. Now, we need to compute the output vectors. And remember, the output vectors were
going to be a weighted combination of the data vectors,
where those weights are the values in the softmax. And it turns out that this is also something
that matrix multiply does. Another way to think about matrix multiply is that when you take a matrix multiply of two matrices,
a different way to view a matrix multiply is that it takes a linear combination of, oh man, am I going to get the rows and the columns in the right way?
But I think you get the linear combination of the columns of one of your input matrices, weighted by the values in the other input matrix.
So this is another interpretation of matrix multiplication. So then if you work through the indices and draw some little pictures for yourself
to prove to yourself what's going on, it also turns out that in order to compute--
now, what we want to do is compute many linear combinations of the data vectors, where each linear combination will
be given by the probabilities in one of the rows of the attention matrix. So we can compute all at once with another matrix multiply
between the attention matrix A and for data vectors X. And again, you need to get the transposes in the right order
to make this work out. But basically, this is the exact same operation that we just saw, but we're now doing it for a set of query vectors all at once.
And it turns out that we can do it all at once with just a couple of matrix multiplies.
A next way that we'll generalize this is notice that in this equation, the data
vectors X are actually entering in two different places in this computation. The first place that we're using the data
vectors X is to compute similarities with the query vectors in this similarities computation.
So in that notion, what we're trying to do is say, oh, for a data vector, how much do you line up with each query vector
as measured by an inner product? But then we're also using the data vectors, again, to compute the output vectors.
So the output vectors are now a linear combination of the data vectors weighted by our attention weights.
And it maybe seems a little bit weird to reuse the data vectors in those two different contexts.
So now, what we want to do is separate those two usages of the data vectors and let the network figure out
for itself, two different ways to use the data vectors in those two contexts.
So to do that, we'll introduce this idea of keys and queries. So now, what we're going to do is,
we had a set of data vectors, but what we're going to do is, for each data vector, we're going to project each data
vector into two vectors. One is a key vector. One is a value vector. And the idea of the key vectors are the key vectors
are going to be compared with the query vectors to compute the alignment scores. And the value vectors are what we're
going to compute linear combinations of in order to compute the output from the layer.
And this also-- so then the way that we implement this is we add two learnable weight matrices, the key matrix
and the value matrix, which are going to be linear projections that project the input--
or that project the data vectors into key vectors and value vectors. So now, the data vectors, remember,
we have N data vectors, each of dimension Dx. So now, the key matrix is a linear transformation
that projects from Dx into Dq because we know that we're going to compare the key vectors
with the query vectors. So they need to have the same dimension as the query vectors. So that will project each-- so then applying matrix multiply of K
equals XWk will project each data vector into a key vector of dimension Dq.
Then we'll separately have another weight matrix that projects from Dx to Dv, which
is the dimension of the value vectors, which in principle could be different than the query vector dimension.
And then we'll separately project each data vector into a value vector, again, with a matrix multiply operator here.
And the intuition here is that it's like in a search engine, you want to separate what you're looking for from the answer you
want in response to that query. So you go to Google, or these days, ChatGPT and you
type in like, what is the best school in the world? That's your query. And then the value you get-- well, that's the query that needs to be combined
with the keys in the back end. But then the value, the data you want to get back from that query, is actually different from the query you typed in.
So we want to separate this idea of you put your query in, what is the best school in the world? That query needs to go match on all the different strings
on the internet. And then the value you want to get back from that query is Stanford, which
is a different value, which is different from the query that you put in. So that's the intuition. Another intuition between separating
the keys and the queries and the values in this way, the query is what I'm looking for. The key is-- in the back end, we have some record of all the data
back there in the data vectors. But when we query, we want to match up against part of the-- potentially, just part
of the data vector. And then the thing we want to get back from the data vector is the value. So we're separating the usage of the data vectors
into those two different notions of keys and values. Then we can visualize this in a different way.
So now, we're finally throwing away the RNN and we're looking at attention just as an operator on its own.
So we can step through this operation again. We've got our query vectors coming in. We've got our data vectors coming in.
Now, what we're going to do is from the data vectors, we're going to project each data vector into a key and a value.
Then we're going to compare each key with each query to get our similarity scores.
So this is a similarity-- this is a matrix of scalars, giving the similarities between each key and each query.
Then once we have this matrix of similarity scores, we want to compute a distribution over each--
a distribution over the data vectors for each query. So that means we need to run softmax
over this matrix of alignment scores, where we compute the softmax over each row.
Then what we do is, we want to reweight the value vectors by the attention scores in the softmax.
Oh, actually, no, sorry, we want each-- we want each column to be-- we want each column to be a distribution.
Because we want, for each query, a distribution over the keys. Which means we want softmax over the columns
because we want it to be aligned to the columns. So then what we do is we've got this query one.
We've predicted this distribution over all of the keys from this computation.
Then we're going to take a linear combination of the values weighted by these attention weights and compute a linear combination of the value vectors
to produce our first output vector, Y1. And then the same thing happens over here. Our second query got compared with all the keys.
We computed a distribution over those alignment scores to get a distribution over the keys for the second query, which then get linearly combined--
then we use those to linearly combine the values to produce our output vector.
So now, this is now the attention operator standing on its own, divorced from the recurrent neural network.
The question is, how do you divide the data vector into keys and values? The beautiful part is we don't have to say how.
We just give the neural network the capacity to split it by itself by giving it
this mechanism to project separately into keys and values. But we're not going to tell it how to do it.
These are just going to be-- the key matrix and the value matrix are just going to be learnable parameters of the model that will be learned via gradient descent along with everything
else. So just as we did not tell it how to align the English and the French sentences, all of that was learned via gradient descent,
the model will learn for itself, how to separately project into keys and values in a way that's
sensible for the problem-- that's helpful for the problem it's trying to solve. So the keys and values, you might think of it
as some kind of filter. So the data vector might have a lot of stuff in there. But for the task at hand, we might want to filter the data vector in various ways
and only try to match our queries against part of it. And we only care about retrieving information of a different part of it.
So you could think of those as, yeah, filtering the information in the data vector in two different ways.
OK, so this is basically our attention operator. And now, there's no RNN here. This is just a neural network layer
that you could have standing on its own. It receives two inputs, the query vectors in the data vectors.
It has two weights of learnable parameters, which are the key matrix and the value matrix. It inputs two sequences of vectors,
outputs a sequence of vectors. So this is a neural network layer in its own right that you could start to plug into your neural network
architectures in various places. This is sometimes called a cross-attention layer because it has two sets of inputs coming in.
The idea is, we have both data vectors and query vectors. They're potentially coming from two different sources.
And this is sometimes useful. So that I have a set of queries. For each query, I want to go and summarize information
from my data, which is potentially different, or a different number, or totally different from my query vectors.
So this is sometimes called a cross-attention layer because we're cross-attending between two different sets of things.
But there's another version of this that happens maybe even more commonly is a self-attention layer.
So here, what we're going to do is, we only have one set of things. We only have one sequence of inputs.
We have one set of vectors, one sequence of vectors that we're processing. And then so now, we no longer have this separation
between data vectors and query vectors. We just have one set of input vectors that we would like to process.
So in a self-attention layer, we're going to have one-- we're going to have a set of input vectors, and we're going to produce a set of output vectors.
So we want to input a set of vectors x, output a set of vectors y that are the same number as the input vectors.
But now, the mechanism of this is, basically, the same attention mechanism that we just saw. But now, rather than projecting-- but then
we're still going to use this notion of filtering. But now, rather than projecting our data vectors into keys and queries, as we previously did, now,
what we're going to do is take each one of our input vectors and project it to three different things.
From each of our input vectors, we're going to project it to a query, to a key, and to a value.
And so the equations change just a little bit, but the picture over here doesn't actually
change very much. For each of our input vectors, we separately project it to a query, to a key, and to a value.
And now, we have the exact same computation. Now, we've got queries, we've got keys, we've got values.
From the perspective of everything happening up here, it's all the same. It just so happened that we computed
the keys and the queries and the values all from different linear projections of those same input
vectors. But all the computation is otherwise shared. Yeah, question is, what are D in and D out?
How are they sized? So these are going to be architectural hyperparameters of the layer. Just when we have a learnable linear layer in a model,
a linear layer basically projects from D in to a D out, those are going to be architectural hyperparameters of the layer.
Same thing with a self-attention layer, the D in and the D out are going to be architectural hyperparameters of the layer.
And in principle, they could be different. There's enough there's enough flexibility in this architecture
so that, in principle, D in and D out could be different. Although I don't think I've almost ever seen that.
In practice, they're almost always the same. So I've been like a little bit extra general in the notation here.
OK, so I don't know that we necessarily need to walk through this. Oh actually, there is one important thing. So I said that we are separately projecting the inputs
into queries, keys, and values. So that happens via three matrix multiplies with our three learnable weight matrices.
Now, we have three learnable weight matrices, one for keys, one for values, one for queries. And we separately project the input vectors X
into keys, queries, and values. But in practice, we can, actually, typically compute just one matrix multiply all at once for those
because it's typically more efficient on hardware to do fewer large matrix multiplies than it is to do more
smaller matrix multiplies. So a pretty common trick in practice is to fuse-- is to concatenate these three matrices along the dimensions
and compute all of these keys, queries, and values for all the input vectors all at once with one big matrix multiply.
If you've read transformers before, they sometimes separate between encoder and decoder transformers, or encoder decoder attention.
So in that case, this would be the decoder only attention if you've read transformer papers before.
And which corresponds to the way that it's used in the decoder of the RNN in the initial example at the beginning of class.
But this mechanism is actually just the most-- the most commonly used flavor of attention nowadays is this sort of so-called decoder
only attention. So we are quite divorcing ourselves away from the RNN now. So this flavor of it doesn't really
make sense to be used in the RNN that we saw at the beginning of class. So we've basically been doing a little bit of sleight of hand
here, where we introduced this architecture for the purpose of RNN in this very concrete case of machine
translation, sequence to sequence. But we've now generalized it to become a totally different operator that can be used all on its own.
And in this particular generalization into self-attention, it actually no longer can be used in that decoder in RNN.
But it's a very useful primitive that gets used in a lot of other places, it turns out. OK, the question is, what's the benefit or difference
between the self-attention versus the cross-attention? They would get used in different contexts. So in some situations, you naturally
have two different kinds of data that you want to compare, which we saw, for example, in the machine translation setting.
We have an input sentence. We have an output sentence. We believe that there's some natural structure in the problem, that there's two different sets of things
that we want to compare. That also might happen in, say, image captioning. Say, we have an input image, we want
to produce an output sentence, there's two different kinds of things we want to compare-- pieces of the image and tokens in the words
that we're generating. So for some problems, there's just this natural structure, where you have two different kinds of things floating around.
But for other problems, there aren't two kinds of things. There's just one thing. So say, you're doing image classification,
then there's only an image. We just want to process the image. So in that case, we just want to compare parts of an image with itself.
And that's where you would use a self-attention layer. So they just get used for different kinds of problems.
But we want to-- but crucially, we want to reuse, basically, the same machinery and the same computational primitives
to be used in those different kinds of problems. And that's really beneficial. There's a couple interesting things about attention
that I want to get through. So one is like, let's consider what happens if you permute the inputs.
We had a set of input vectors, what happens if you shuffle them and process them in a different order? Now actually, a lot of interesting stuff happens.
So the keys, the queries, and the values will all end up the same because they are computed as linear projections of the input.
So we'll end up getting the same keys, queries, and values. They'll just be in a different order, shuffled in the same way
that the inputs were. And now, because our similarity scores were just dot products, we'll also end up with the same similarity scores,
just, again, shuffled in accordance with the way we shuffle the input. Same thing with the softmax. Softmax doesn't actually care about the order of its inputs.
So the softmax is now operating on the same vector but shuffled. So each column of our attention weights
will end up the same as they did before, just shuffled, and then same thing with linear combinations. So our outputs Y will actually still be the same outputs
as we had before. They'll just all be shuffled. So that means that there's a really interesting structure here called permutation equivariance.
Remember, we saw this a couple lectures ago with convolution. Now, we see a different equivariance property
of these self-attention layers. Which is that if we shuffle the inputs, then the output-- then we get the same outputs,
just shuffled in the same way that the inputs were shuffled. And this kind of means, in this case,
that self-attention doesn't actually care about the order of the inputs. If we change the order of the inputs,
we'll get the same outputs just shuffled in the same way. The computation of the layer does not depend on the order in which we present the inputs.
So that means that we can think of self-attention actually not as operating on sequences of vectors.
They happen to be packed into an ordered sequence of a matrix. But we really think of it, instead, as operating on an unordered set of vectors
because the outputs that we get don't actually depend on what order we packed those vectors into our input
matrix. So we really think about this as a kind of different neural network primitive that fundamentally operates on sets of vectors, rather than sequences
of vectors. But this is, sometimes, a problem. Sometimes, it is useful to tell the neural network what the order of the seq-- what the order of the entries is.
So as a quick fix to that, we'll sometimes concatenate an additional piece of data onto each of the input vectors, called a positional embedding,
that is basically some piece of data that tells the neural network, this one's at index one, this one's at index two, this one's index three, blah,
blah, blah, blah, blah. And there's a bunch of different mechanisms for that. The question is, is it going to train to the same result?
I'm not really talking about the training here. I'm talking about if you fix the weight matrices and just consider the computation of the layer,
then if I were to shuffle the inputs, then I receive the same outputs but they'll be shuffled in the same way that the inputs were shuffled.
So the question of what vectors do I compute at the output does not depend on the order of the vectors in the input.
But the order of the vectors I get from the output does depend on the order that they were presented in the input. So there's another couple of tricks
we can do with self-attention, but I'll go through these a little bit faster. So sometimes, in a full self-attention layer,
we allowed every piece of the input to look at every other piece of the input. But for some problems, we might want
to impose some structure on this computation and say that certain pieces of the input are only allowed to look at certain other pieces
of the input, rather than looking at-- rather than everything being allowed to look at everything. And we can implement this via notion
called masked self-attention. So what we're going to do is after we compute these alignment scores E, we're going
to go in and override the alignment scores with negative infinities in places where we want to block the attention.
And now, if you have a negative infinity in your alignment scores, then after you do a softmax, it's going to end up as a 0 if you walk through the softmax
computation. So that means that if there's a 0-- whenever there's a negative infinity in the alignment scores, we end up with a 0
in the softmax score-- in the scores after the softmax. Which means that output Y will not depend on the value vector computed at that index.
So this is a mechanism to let us control which inputs are allowed to interact with each other in the process of the computation.
And we might want to do this now for language modeling because now, we've generalized this operator to the point, where we don't need an RNN at all.
We can just use this for the same problem that we used to use in RNN for. So now, we can use it to process sequence of words,
like attention is very and then output is very cool. So then in this case, we're doing the same language modeling
task that we saw last lecture with RNNs. But we can now just do it natively with this self-attention block.
But in this case, we want to make the first output "is" only depend on the first word. The second output "very" only allowed to depend on the first
two words. We don't want to let the network look ahead in the sequence and cheat. So here is where we would use masking.
Another thing that we'll sometimes do with self-attention is called multi-headed self-attention, where you run n copies each separate independent copies
of self-attention in parallel. Why do you want to do this? Because it's more computation, it's more flops, it's more parameters.
Deep learning, we always want more and bigger. And this is another way that you can make this layer more
and bigger and more powerful. So what we're going to do is take our inputs X, route them to H independent copies
of separate self-attention layers. Those will each produce their own outputs Y, which will then stack up along the output and then fuse--
and then have another linear projection at the output to fuse the output data from each of the independent self-attention layers.
And now in this case, this is called multi-headed self-attention. And this is basically the format that we always see in practice.
So this is-- whenever you see self-attention used these days, it's almost always this multi-headed self-attention
version. And in practice, it turns out that you can compute this all with matrix multiplies as well.
So you don't have to run a for loop. You can compute each of these H copies of self-attention
all in parallel if you're clever and use batch matrix multiplies all in the right places. So in fact, this whole self-attention operator
seems like a lot of stuff going on, but it's really, basically, just four matrix multiplies. We have one matrix multiply, where we take our inputs
and project them to queries, keys, and values. We have another matrix multiply, where we compute Qk similarity.
For each Q, we compute the similarity against all the K's. And that's one big batched matrix multiply now
in the multi-headed case. We have another one called V weighting, where we want to take linear combinations of all
the values weighted by the softmax entries. And that can be done in another big batched matrix multiply.
And then finally, we have an output projection to mix information across our different heads
of our self-attention. So even though there's a lot of equations, there's a lot of vectors flying around, this whole self-attention operator
is basically just four big batch matrix multiplies. And that's great because matrix multiplies are
a really scalable, powerful primitive that we can distribute, we can optimize, and we can make this thing highly parallel, highly
scalable, highly efficient. Yeah, question is that the x1, x2, x3, they're exactly the same.
Yeah, but we're just going to have, basically, separate copies of the self-attention layer.
They will all be random. They'll all have different weights, critically. And those weights will be initialized randomly,
different at initialization. So it'll end up learning to process them in slightly different ways. So this is just a way to give extra capacity to the layer.
Oh, yeah, the only thing different between different heads is the weights. So while the architecture is exactly the same, the computation is exactly the same,
but they'll have different weights. And those weights will be initialized to different things at initialization. But other than that, it's all exactly the same.
OK, there's some stuff there that we can skip. But now, basically, we've gotten to one really interesting place,
where we have, basically, three different ways to process sequences that we've seen in this class. The first is recurrent neural networks.
We saw that recurrent neural networks basically operate on 1D ordered sequences. And they're really cool.
They're really powerful. People like them for a long time. But they're fundamentally not very parallelizable. Because of this concurrent structure,
where each hidden state depends on the previous hidden state, then they're just a fundamentally sequential algorithm.
There's no way to parallelize this across the sequence. And that makes them very difficult to scale, very difficult to make very big.
Another primitive that we've seen is convolution. And convolution basically operates on multidimensional grids.
We've seen it in two-dimensional grids in the case of images. You can also run them on 1D grids, 3D grids, 4D grids.
And convolution, basically, is something that mixes information locally in N dimensional grids.
This is great. It's very parallelizable. Because by this notion of sliding a kernel around a grid,
each position that we might want to place the kernel can, in principle, be computed in parallel. So this is a very parallelizable primitive.
But it has a hard time building up large receptive fields. If we want to summarize an entire very long input
sequence, or an entire very large image with convolution, we either need to have very large convolutional kernels,
or stack up many, many, many convolutional layers. So that still introduces some fundamental sequentiality
in the way that we need to process large pieces of data. And now, self-attention, basically,
is a separate kind of primitive that operates on sets of vectors. It naturally generalizes to long sequences.
There are no bottlenecks in the way that there are in recurrent neural networks. There's also no necessity of stacking up
many, many layers of them to let all the vectors look at each other. In one layer of self-attention, every vector
looks at every other vector. So with just one layer, you can summarize-- you can do a lot of computation.
And it's also highly parallelizable. As we saw, the whole operation is just four big matrix multiplies. And matrix multiplies are a great primitive
that we can distribute. We can run on GPUs. We can run in very scalable, distributed ways.
The only downside of attention is that it's expensive. It ends up having n squared compute for a sequence of length n and n squared,
or later n, or n memory for a sequence of length n. And if your n ends up being like 100,000, 1 million, 10 million,
n squared becomes very expensive. But you can solve that by buying more GPUs. So that's basically the solution that people
have come up with here. So basically, attention has become this super awesome primitive that
is super powerful for processing very arbitrary pieces of data. And you might be wondering, which of these you should use?
Attention is all you need. It turns out that of the three, you can get a long way using only attention.
Now, the question is, is parallelizable, what's the advantage of that? The advantage of that is that in the history of computing,
it gets hard to make processors faster. We've run up against this limit as a fundamental limit in hardware.
That it's become very difficult to make individual processes faster. But what we can do very easily is get a lot of processors.
So the way that we are able to marshal more computation over the last two decades is finding
algorithms that do not require running on one really fast processor. But instead, if we can have an algorithm that can make use
of 10 processors, or 100 processors, or 1,000 processors, or a million processors, I want to blanket the entire Stanford
campus with processors and have all of them working together in concert to process this big thing. If we can find algorithms that do that,
that's how we can scale up and get really big, powerful computations. So the benefit of parallelizability
is that if you have algorithms that can trivially make use of more and more and more processors in parallel, then we can scale up those algorithms
without having to wait for our individual processors to become faster, which they may never will. Yeah, is there a trade-off with the n squared?
I think the n squared is actually a good thing. So it seems bad. You're taught in computer science that parameters inside that n is bad.
But in the case of neural networks, for compute, it could actually be a good thing because more compute means the network is doing more computation,
it has more ability to think, more ability to process. So actually, the more compute the network does on the input sequence, actually, maybe the better
answer it could arrive to. So it means that it's more expensive, but that's not necessarily a bad thing.
So basically, the transformer is now a neural network architecture that puts self-attention at the core of everything.
So our input is going to be a set of vectors X. Then we're going to run all those vectors through self-attention, which
is, as we just said, this amazing primitive that lets all the vectors talk to each other. After that, we'll wrap that self-attention
in a residual connection for all the same reasons that we wanted to use residual connections in ResNets just a couple of lectures ago.
Then we will take the output of that residual connection, pass it through a layer normalization. Because as we saw in ResNets and in CNNs,
adding normalization inside your architectures makes them train more stably. But then now, there's something interesting.
Because the self-attention, basically, what it does is compares all the vectors with each other. And that's a very useful primitive.
That's a very powerful thing to do. But we also want to give this network the ability to perform processing on vectors independently one-by-one.
So then there's a second primitive inside the transformer, which is the multi-layer perceptron, MLP, also called FFN.
But basically, this is a little two layer neural network that operates independent-- that is run independently on each one of our vectors inside.
So then this works in concert with the self-attention, where self-attention lets all the vectors talk to each other
and compare with each other and the FFN or MLP lets us perform computation on each vector
independently. We'll also wrap the MLP in a residual connection, put a layer normalization, and put a box around the whole thing
and call it a neural network block. So this is our transformer block. And a transformer is just a sequence of transformer blocks.
And these things have gotten much, much bigger over time. The architectures haven't changed too much since 2017
when this was introduced. The original transformer was something like 12 blocks, 200 million parameters and now, where
people are training transformers with hundreds of blocks and trillions of parameters.
So this same architecture has scaled across many orders of magnitude in compute and size and parameters over the past eight years.
They can be used both for language modeling as we already seen. They also can be used for images.
And here, the application is fairly straightforward. Given an image, we basically divide the image up into patches, project each of those patches
separately into a vector. Those vectors then get passed as inputs to our transformer.
And then the output gives us one output from the transformer for every patch in the input.
Now, if you want to do something like a classification score, or do a classification problem, then you do a pooling operation on all the vectors coming out
of the transformer and have a linear layer that predicts your class scores. So then this same architecture of a transformer
can be applied both to a language and to images and to a lot of other things as well.
I mentioned, there have been a couple minor tweaks to transformers since they were first introduced. But we're running out of time so I'll just
leave those as extra reading. So the summary of where we get to at the end of this lecture is, basically, two things that I promised at the beginning.
One is that we introduced attention, which is this new primitive that lets us operate on sets of vectors.
It's highly parallelizable. It's basically just a couple of matrix multiplies. So it's highly scalable, highly parallelizable, highly flexible.
It can be applied in a lot of different situations. And the transformer, which is now a neural network architecture that uses self-attention
as its main computational primitive. And the transformer is basically the neural network architecture
that every application in deep learning is using these days. So that's super powerful, super interesting, super exciting.
The transformers have been with us for eight years now. And I don't see them really dying anytime soon.
So that's pretty exciting. So that's basically it for today's lecture. And then next time, we'll come back
and talk about some new tasks-- detection, segmentation, visualization, and see how we can use these architectures to do
new cool things.

OK. Today, we'll be talking about different tasks of core Computer
Vision, algorithms and tasks, detection and segmentation.
We will also be covering topics around visualization and understanding. I will cover the most important ones.
Like the previous lecture last time,
what we discussed was around the topic of transitioning
from sequence to sequence models, RNNs to transformers.
And we saw that transformers were defined by having some encoder, a number of layers,
which had multi-headed, self-attention, and layer norm,
as well as some MLP layers. And this was, ultimately, called something
that we now refer to as encoder encoding the sequence. And then if we need to decode an image or a language, a sequence
as the output, then similar type of architecture is used for decoder getting the encoder tokens as input,
taking those as input, and then generating what is--
I'm hoping that you can see my cursor too, what is the desired output.
We did talk-- Justin talked quite extensively about the differences
of modeling sequences, recurrent neural networks, RNNs,
and their variations that we've talked last week, I think, on Tuesday about and then using convolution also as
another approach. But we talked about, ultimately, that self-attention
is what we work with in many of the applications these days.
They work much better than the other two.
They are more expensive. They do add computation and memory requirements,
but that comes with much better modeling of the sequence and better results in terms of any of the tasks.
So until here, it was mostly talking about self-attention.
We also talked a little bit about cross-attention and related topics.
And then we got to the topic of vision transformers, which is one of the core models that is
being used in modern applications, Computer Vision applications. We did go through this in the last minutes of last lecture,
the previous lecture. And I want to revisit the topic. And after that, I'll stop and hear any questions or comments,
you may have regarding the assignments and everything that I talked about so far. We talked about the fact that what
we do with transformers, when we want to process images,
we split the image into patches, basically creating a sequence.
The image was split to S by S or in this case, maybe a 3
by 3 patches. And each of those patches are then
represented by what we call tokens. And tokens are often a linear projection
of the vector, the reshaped version
of the image into a vector. And it's basically a D-dimensional vector,
as you can see in this slide. But because we have turned the image into patches, what becomes important-- what
are we losing here? It's basically we're losing the position, the 2D position of the image.
So that's why we often create or add something that we
call positional embedding. And there are many different ways of doing this.
You can create a sequence, just put numbers of sequence as 1, 2, 3, and so on.
Or you can do a 2D version of x and y-coordinates,
and adding these two together creates the new token that goes
to the transformer layer the same way all of the self-attention, layer norm,
and everything that we've talked about, MLP, everything, we talked about last week.
And then the output layer will generate the output vectors for us. It could be used for any application.
One of the major applications in Computer Vision has been classification. We started with image classification.
So with image classification, what becomes important is to somehow be able to encode or generate something
as the output that is representative of the class. So what we do is often, we add one token, a special extra input
to the transformer, which is of the same dimensionality,
but it's a learnable parameter that in the output space, whatever that represents
is going to be turned into the class probability vector.
So a C-dimensional vector, which is the class probabilities. And that's what we often call the class token.
So this is one of the base and most standard way
of doing using ViTs, vision transformers, for image classification.
But transformers are not only used for classification, they could be used for many other tasks
that we will be covering some of those today as well. But last week, we also talked about this other variant
of the transformers. Again, same tokens. And from the tokens we go with the transformer layers.
If you remember last time, we talked about these multiple layers of transformers.
As I said, positional embeddings are added. And here, because we see the entire image all together,
we don't have to do masking like we did for language, because language is really a sequence
that we shouldn't be using the future information for. And then, ultimately, transformers
give an output of a vector patch for each of the inputs.
And the other option for training a transformer is actually to instead of having a separate class token,
just take the outputs, run a pooling layer, and then turn that into a probability
vector for C different classes. So I talked about two versions of transformers.
One of them was we're using a class token. And the other one was we take all of the output tokens.
We apply pooling and projection into a vector that represents the class probabilities.
How we supervise this? It's the exact same thing that we talked about earlier.
And that was back propagation, defining a loss function, binary cross-entropy, the soft log, max
loss, and so on. So this was ViTs.
This is ViTs in a nutshell. And over the years, this type of architecture
for many different applications have remained the same. Many modern architectures right now use many of these components
very similar to what we presented here. But there are some optimizations that we
had in the slides last week, but I think I'll just spend quickly a couple of minutes on them.
But I want you to understand that there are many different tweaks and optimizations for better
performance, and also making the transformers, the training a little bit more stable.
One of them is actually the residual connections. This layer norm is basically outside the residual
So this means that whatever we get here, we normalize it. So this doesn't really mean that we can't replicate
any form of identity function anymore, that resonates really wanted to do. So the solution for that is to bring
in the layer normalization. We often put it before self-attention
and the second one before the MLP layer. So normalization is there.
But we also preserve our identity function. There are also other ways of normalizing.
There is this RMSNorm, root mean square normalization, which is actually a very basic type of normalization.
For each of the features, it doesn't use the mean value of the feature for normalization.
But this makes the training a little bit more stable. Again, these are all empirically shown to be better options.
Although there are some justifications why while they work well. But mostly, the reason for adopting these
is just the fact that they make the trainings more stable.
The other option is to instead of using a simple MLP,
we use a SwiGLU MLP, where we actually do some--
this is what we call gated nonlinearity. Instead of having two vectors of weights, matrices of W1 and W2,
we add a third one, 1, 2, and 3. But here, we create some gated nonlinearity.
Basically, what it does is getting more trainable
parameters and not just necessarily trainable parameters, but creating a better nonlinearity
for a small architecture. Even if we select the hidden layer value equal to 8
divided by 3, it keeps the same size of the network in terms of the number of parameters,
but it does learn higher dimensional nonlinearities
in that layer. The last piece is mixture of experts that is often used in even the very modern architectures
these days. Instead of having one set of MLP layers, we can have multiple sets of MLP layers.
Each of those will be an expert. And what we do is through a router,
the tokens will be routed to A of those E experts.
And in this way, we actually have A active experts.
But then, again, what it does is it increases the number of parameters,
and it helps learning more robust models without increasing
too much on the compute. And these, again, are all parallel MLPs.
So we can have multiple experts in parallel. As I said, they are used in all LLMs
these days, large language models, and all of the modern LLMs up to the level
that we know about are using these types of tweaks.
And this is the summary of all of the tweaks that I just mentioned. This is similar to [? bias. ?] No.
This is completely a trainable parameter by itself that you train, either a feedforward network or just
a linear projection to turn that into the probability vector. So it's not [? just bias. ?]
And then again, remember that you have so many self-attention networks here, layers here.
And those self-attention layers are basically fusing the information, creating attention between all of the tokens and this class
token. So when you supervise it from here, the loss function comes in. This will represent the class probabilities vector.
So the question is, if there are nice intuitions, what different experts are doing?
That's a great question. Because they are trained in parallel,
and they are initialized differently, they often try to learn one aspect or a related, maybe also
sometimes very much related aspect, but it's just adding more compute and more parameters,
giving the network to learn different things, if it does have to learn multiple concepts.
For example, if you have to cover multiple probability distributions, then with these MLPs,
you often have the power to separate those modes of data. So the question is, if the number of experts
is a hyperparameter or not? Yes, definitely, it's a hyperparameter.
From what I know, it's often predefined. Don't necessarily like over fine tune them.
But yes, they are all hyperparameters. They are also learned. Yes. And they are learned.
So why moving the layer norm helps us
learn identity transformation? So look at this architecture. Will you be able to create any form of identity?
Because right after that residual connection, the feature values are changed, because you
have a normalization. You will never have the identity in the features. Because right after that, you see the layer normalization.
And that's why, what we do is we bring it in. We have quite a few different tasks in Computer Vision.
And these were the core and the most important tasks
over the years for Computer Vision applications. Although these days, we are solving much harder tasks.
And nobody cares about object detection anymore, because now, we can just do it with one line of code.
But over the past 10, 15 years, there has been a lot of advances. And we want to cover, I want to really cover some of those
today. Just so if you have to design something new yourself, you know where to look and how to design your models.
And then, ultimately, there is the topic of visualization and understanding, which is very
important in many applications. For example, if you're working with medical data,
often, the visualization understanding is more important than the classification itself or detection of tumor, for example,
if you want to know where, why, and so on.
The way we started the class, and this slide is probably
very much familiar to everybody, we talked about different tasks.
And for object classification, for the task of classification,
we talked about this. We spent quite a lot of time over the first few lectures,
seeing how we can create a classifier that classifies images from pixels into labels.
But then one of the other tasks important similarly
is semantic segmentation. And within semantic segmentation, what we care about is to assign a label to every single pixel
inside the image, turn each of the pixels into a label that is the label for that object
or anything in the scene. So basically, when we train a model that
does this at the test time, we want to take an image and generate the same map as the output.
How do we do that? There are many different options. So let's say, what I can do is just
look at each pixel, every single pixel, and say what the value
or what the label for that pixel should be. In the very basic form, as you can see here,
it's actually very much impossible. It's hard to say what pixel that represents that specific-- what
object that specific pixel represents because there is no context, if you only look at the pixel itself.
So that's why context is important. We look at the surrounding areas.
And then if I take these patches and the pixel
in the center and the surrounding areas, now, I can train a convolutional neural network
or any network that generates the output label for us. It's the same architecture that we've
talked about over the quarter. And you can select any of those that we
used for image classification. Because now, you're classifying the entire image. It could be a CNN, it could be a ResNet, it could be a ViT,
or whatever. This is really time consuming because if you
want to run one full network for every single pixel in an image,
it will take forever to turn this into a segmentation map. The other option that we can use is
to instead of running one network for every single pixel,
what if we train a neural network that takes the image as the input and outputs the entire pixel map,
the segmentation map, not just one single label, a matrix of labels?
And in that case, we will have our segmentation task solved.
And in order to do that, we need to have a layer in the input that is the same size as the image.
And also in the output, we also need some sort of an inflated layer.
You can't go to fully connected layers, and so on, because now,
we are generating an image. And because of that, we need to keep the network inflated.
And then that's what we call, often, fully convolutional
neural networks or FCNs. So with fully convolutional neural networks,
this is definitely a great idea. But there is a caveat. There is a problem.
These images are large. And these networks, these layers will become very large.
And there will be so many parameters to optimize, especially in the early years that we didn't have powerful GPUs,
this was a bottleneck, a problem, a challenge for training algorithms.
And that's why the algorithms evolved into starting from full-size images going down
in terms of the resolution, making the convolutions, the spatial resolutions smaller and smaller
through downsampling operations. And then somewhere in the middle,
we will have a low resolution, but somehow thick in terms of the number of channels.
And then from there, what we do is we go back up to the same size of the image
to create the output pixel. And in order to do that, we know how to do the downsampling.
Downsampling was easy. We've talked about it. We talked about pooling operation, strided convolution,
and several other steps or operations that
could be used here. But on the upsampling side, we don't really
know how to do the upsampling because we don't have pooling or reverse of up pooling or reverse strided convolutions.
And because of that, we had to invent some new operations that reverses downsampling by itself.
But before I go to the upsampling,
defining what upsampling is, I just briefly want to tell you that, maybe I can ask you a question.
How do you think this network is trained? Because now, we have a network that starts from an image
and ends with an image. And then the tools that we have for training this network
was a loss function. How do you think is the best to train or define a loss
function for this network? We talked about softmax loss.
We talked also a little bit about some regression losses and SVM loss.
But assuming that we want to use softmax loss function,
how could we define this or train this network? What would the objective be?
So you said mean classification loss for each of the pixels. And that's correct.
You can add the loss function for every single pixel, because every single pixel is doing a classification.
So you will have a sigma over all pixels of the image. And the loss function is just a simple softmax.
And then you can backprop. That's the entire loss function that you need.
The question is, do we need, what we call, ground truths for training?
So that's actually the ground truths of segmentation. And yes, for these types of algorithms, because they are fully supervised,
we do need the ground truths label maps. And early years, there has been a lot
of work doing and sitting down and manually labeling the pixels to be able to train these algorithms.
Yes. These days, we don't need that because we have tools. But early on, in order to train these algorithms,
we needed the ground truth.
Very briefly, let me tell you what we do with upsampling. Upsampling is actually not that hard.
We can use an unpooling operation. There are different ways of doing it.
One is nearest neighbor. If I want to go from a 2 by 2 as an example here,
a matrix 2 by 2, 4 by 4. I just need to copy the data for each of these,
take the nearest neighbor in the lower resolution one. Or bed of nails is you just select
one of those in the upsampled version. You only select one of those, the one in the corner.
To copy the data, replace everything else with zero. And through multiple layers of convolution,
these values will start appearing.
If we use max pooling in our network,
in the encoding side, what we can do is we can save the locations of the max, the ones that
were selected, and then copy the data in the unpooling max,
unpooling stage right over there that the max was defined.
So basically, we save the locations. In the encoding part and in decoding part
in the upsampling step, we reuse those saved coordinates.
The other option is to do a learned upsampling. All of these that I showed there is no parameter to be learned.
It's just an operation. But learned upsampling are also possible.
Very simply, let's revisit the convolution. In the convolution layer, what we did
was applying a convolution filter for a pixel and generating the output, and do this repeatedly
for all of the pixels. And when we wanted to do--
to downsample, what we did was strided convolution, where, instead of taking steps of 1,
we take steps of 2, and generate the outputs step by step. If you don't remember this part, go back to the lecture.
We talked about it. Third lecture, I think. And then we can replicate the same for the upsampling process.
So this one will represent this area in the upsampled image.
And then we define some weights here to map that to the output map.
And then for the next one, same story, but there will be overlaps. And for the overlaps, we often sum over the values.
Let me give you an example, sum over the outputs. Let me give you an example.
And that's with a simple 1D function. If the input is just two values of A and B,
we learn a filter that that filter maps it to the higher
resolution output. And for doing that, we just apply the filter
to each of the values and write the outputs here. For the parts that there is an overlap, it's the summation.
Addition of what is coming from each of the two locations.
So we did talk about this fully convolutional neural networks
and how they are being used. These are actually some of the most basic and mostly widely
used algorithms for segmentation. And I want to also, very quickly,
highlight one of the widely used networks units.
As you can see, the shape U, it's actually the same architecture as I showed here. Just let's draw it as similar to a U shape.
And the reason that I'm highlighting this is that still, today, some of the medical applications
that work on segmentation, use segmentation algorithms, still, this unit or its variants generate the state-of-the art
results, if you don't want to use any foundation model. So what it does is exactly what we explained.
A downsampling phase that increases the field of view and loses some spatial information,
and then upsampling phase that goes back to the image resolution.
The only difference that U-Net has is because it's used for segmentation,
there is this understanding that we need to keep the spatial information in the decoder side,
because when we downsample, we somehow lose resolution. And then upsampling, if you don't have the information,
it's going to be a little bit hard. And we often get into sometimes boundaries are faded.
And in order not to get the feature maps in the encoder side
are actually copied as inputs to the decoder layers.
In that way, you're keeping this structural information
within the image and generate the outputs that are much sharper.
So this was the idea behind U-Net And as I said, it's actually being used quite often.
Summary of semantic segmentation-- what we talked about today, the fully convolutional
neural networks. You have same filter as before that we
had for downsampling here.
To save time, I actually removed some of the slides from this part. And I have it in the back of the slides.
You should check it out. This is a reverse. This is transformed transposed convolution.
So we do have a 3 by 3 matrix here. And then instead of convolving the input image, input data,
we do the convolution on the-- applied convolution on the transposed version of the input.
And it actually generates a larger output. So it's the transposed convolution.
It's the reverse of the regular convolution. But why transposed?
I would refer you to take a look at the additional slides. So the question is, is the filter trained?
Yes. It's very much similar to other convolution layers. All of the filters are trained. Yes. Yeah.
Great. This was the topic of semantic segmentation.
And as we talked about this, we only get labels for the pixels.
But if there are two instances of the same object, we have no idea which one is which.
Because this is just generating or outputting the pixel labels.
And that brings us to the topic of instance segmentation,
where now, we not only care about the pixel classes,
but also, I want you to know that these pixels belong to one instance of the dog.
And this next one is actually a different dog. And for doing that, what we need is understanding
multiple objects in the image and brings us to the topic of object detection.
Object detection has been one of the, besides image
classification or after image classification, has been one of the core Computer Vision problems
and tasks. And for many years, many, many different algorithms
were proposed for just doing the task of object detection.
We are going to fly over some of them and highlight a couple of important ones.
But again, there are so many works in the literature,
even in the literature of deep learning that I am not covering here, so in the past 10, 15 years.
How we can do that and solve the problem of object detection? If it's just a single object, it means that we need to generate--
we need to do the classification, generate a label class scores, as well
as getting a bounding box, coordinates of a box. So we need the coordinates of the box
x, y, and h and w as the output, as well as what class it is.
So this is exactly the task of object detection. How can we solve this? It's very simple.
We can define a softmax loss function for the class scores.
And we can define an L2 loss function, which is a simple distance metric, a regression loss for the box
coordinates. And having these two defined, we have a multi-task loss.
We are solving two tasks at the same time. And for doing that, we, again, add
the loss values and generate a compound loss function,
as you can see here. So this is simple.
It's doable. If you have one single object, you can for sure
solve this problem using this architecture that I talked about. But this is not that easy, if you have
multiple objects in the scene. So for three objects, you have to generate 12 output numbers.
And if there are more, then it's going to be too many numbers to generate.
So this algorithm is not really scalable. It's just extending the classification
into some object detection, which is fine, but it's not really scalable.
So when there are multiple objects,
one solution is instead of going or getting the entire image
as the input, why not to look at bounding boxes. For each bounding box, we can say we only have one label,
and whether it's a cat or a dog or the background. And if I have this way of classifying
each of the bounding boxes, I can do a sliding window. I can create this bounding boxes, slide it over the image from coordinate 0, 0
to all combination of x, y, and h and w, and see if we can detect the object.
So step by step, I can create-- I can find the bounding boxes that I
have the maximum probability of each of the objects. But there is a huge problem here.
Again, there are so many different combinations of bounding boxes that you can use.
And again, this algorithm is not scalable. What we've been doing in the literature, again,
early years, if you look at the years these articles were published, 2014,
and before, there has been a lot of research around finding
regions that they have high probability
of having the object in them. So region proposals. And if I have a way to find region proposals,
that's actually going to be an easy-ish problem. I can do the same thing as I explained earlier.
For an image, what we can do is if I have region proposals, I can just take that part, that patch out
and run a CNN on that patch, a convolutional neural network
on the patch, and then classify it. And in order to-- even I can refine the bounding boxes.
So classify and then refine the bounding boxes
to have the objects detected. So we can classify the boxes and also refine
the bounding boxes, if I have to change the coordinates a little bit. And this is what is called R-CNN algorithm.
And although it works, and, again, this is one of the early
algorithms up to 2014. These are very slow because for each of these boxes, again,
we are running a full convolutional neural network. But there is one catch that what we can do
is instead of running convolutional neural network
on each of these boxes, because convolution operations, they preserve the spatial information.
They either downsample or upsample. We always have a way to track them where in the pixel space
they are. So in that case, what we do is instead of running
the convolutional neural network on the patches, let's say,
we run one big convolution on the entire image. And then now we have the regions in that feature
map, which is corresponding to the entire image. Let's look at those regions. And now, run a smaller CNN on top of those
and generate the outputs for each of these two outputs
that I want. First, the box offset. Should I move the bounding box a little bit?
Or what's the object category is? So this is the fast version of R-CNN
These are some basic algorithms that we can use convolutional neural networks for detecting objects,
their bounding boxes, and so on. The question is, if the number of proposed regions are predefined?
The short answer to that is yes. I will talk very briefly about the region proposal networks do.
So easy algorithms.
One, puts the bounding boxes of the regions, the proposed regions.
Under the images, one puts it on the feature maps of the ConvNet. And both of those generate the output class label,
as well as offset of improving the location of the detected object.
But this will mean, this requires us to do that bounding box region proposal first,
and have a region proposal network that tells us where in the image we should look for.
And there has been research on building region proposal
networks, RPNs. And here, what we do is we just randomly start with a CNN.
We try to randomly start in different locations
in the image. And through layers of convolution, we refine those regions where they have the higher probability
of having an object in them, because we have the object labels and locations.
So we can optimize, we can supervise this. And then each of those also refine the box coordinates.
So basically, a region proposal network, what it does
is it refines the boxes, each of those boxes that
have a probability, a high probability of an object in them, the output boxes.
The box corrections. Again, I'm leaving all of the details about the coordinates
and all of these dimensionalities for you to check afterwards, because they
will take too much time. And we don't want to spend too much time on this algorithm. But what's important here is back to your question,
we often take the top K, the ones that have the highest probability
of having an object in them as the proposals for this image. This is a simple image and only has one object.
So most of the regions are centered around that single object.
But, in general, that's not the case. So in many setups, we can have region proposals
used in different setups. We can get different objects with higher probabilities.
With that, and after talking a little bit about R-CNN and mask R-CNN, which, again, for you,
it's important to go through the details. And if you can spend some time doing the calculations yourself,
that would be very good. But those types of algorithms, R-CNN, mask R-CNN, they
are not being used anymore these days because they are very heavy computationally.
Although it's important to understand how we got to this point. But those are for many reasons.
One of those reasons is that we need two separate networks, one region proposal network, and then one classification and box
refinement network. So it's like at least two passes for detecting objects
for each image. That's why there has been advances
after using single stage, object detectors, SSDs,
and one of the most popular ones is called YOLO. YOLO is probably, if you work with any Computer Vision
problem, you've heard about YOLO even to date. Although it's a convolution heavy network today, at least
its earlier versions. In many even industrial applications,
YOLO is being used as the base for object detection
because it's a fast object detector. And it's very good in terms of detecting the objects.
What YOLO does I want to very briefly tell you a little bit about.
It's basically you look only once in one single pass on the image. You generate all of the bounding boxes.
How it does it is it maps, it divides the image into grid of S
by S And in this example, it's 7 by 7. What happens is that for each single box in that grid,
it tries to output, it creates a fully convolutional network
that outputs the probability of an object being
in that location, refinements of the bounding boxes.
So it generates B bounding boxes, a new hyperparameters, bounding B boxes, that is the refinement of the object that
is present in that box. And also, it generates the class probability, object class
probabilities. And in this case, for example, if it's B equal to 2,
it generates just two bounding boxes with different probabilities. It does this for all of the boxes at the same time.
So basically, it's the same network that is generating something as the output for each
of these bounding boxes. And it does generate a number of different options
for the object. And as I said, each of those boxes are associated with a probability.
And in this example, the probability is shown with the weights of the edges in each of those boxes.
And for these many different bounding boxes and object probabilities, now we can do thresholding.
And also, there is an algorithm that they use in the paper.
Again, I don't want to go into the details-- non-maximum suppression, and some algorithms
with thresholding involved that identifies the ones that have the highest probabilities.
So this is a simple implementation or use of the object detection.
Again, this is something very useful. If you have time, to spend with the repositories of YOLO.
There are so many different newer versions of YOLO that is being used for many applications in medicine,
robotics, and also in many industrial applications. So the question is, how do we get this second image?
And what's the intuition behind it? As I said, for each of the grids, we generate bounding boxes.
For this one, we generated two, for all others, we also generate two.
This bee is, again, a probability vector/ and each of these boxes are associated with probability of existing
an object in them. And then if I put all of them together for all of the patches, I have so many boxes.
And now each of those are associated with a probability.
Perfect Let's move on.
And one of the more recent approaches for object detection
is deter a detection transformer. This is purely based on transformers and the topic
that we discussed last week. And also I started today, same type
of self-attention and cross-attention modules could also generate some object detections and bounding
boxes for us. And how this works? This is actually not a very old paper,
2020, almost five years ago. Although it's now deprecated.
Nobody uses this for real applications. But it's a very good example of how
to use transformers for object detection. And what we do here is basically similar to what
we've explained earlier. We may turn the image into patches.
And then those patches are passed through CNNs creating a token.
Then we add positional encoding the same way that I explained to the patches.
And those define our tokens for the inputs, which are inputs to the transformer encoder, a transformer encoder,
again, a bunch of self-attention layer normalization or any normalization,
as well as MLP layers that generates the output tokens after multiple layers of transformer encoder.
Then, in order to generate the bounding boxes, this is the smart part for this algorithm
that it does take the encoder output tokens as input in the transformer decoder,
but we also define some queries, which are trainable parameters themselves
that each of those, for example, if I add five 5 queries as input
for queries as input, or 10 or 20 queries as input, I'm seeking up to 20 objects to be detected in that image.
And then again, through a combination of self-attention layers in the beginning of this transformer
decoder, as well as cross-attention with the encoder
output. So cross-attention and self-attention networks layers,
it generates the output values for each of these queries, which
are passed through an FNN, feed forward network, to generate either class labels and the bounding boxes,
very similar to what we discussed earlier, or even
in some cases, it just says there is no object to be detected.
And at the end, we have the bounding boxes and the classes associated with bounding boxes as the output.
So the question is, are we inputting every possible box to the transformer? No. The input here are some triangular parameters
that are representing-- they are queries asking
the question that I actually want an object to be outwitted in place of this input query.
So there is no box or anything as the input. It's part of the output that it generates the class
label and the box coordinates. So the question is, if the queries are formed in a way
that it actually represents what we want to look for and where
in the image. In this case, what we are looking for
is defined by class labels, which are predefined, and they are as part of the output.
So our supervision is based on the class labels. We have a class probability vector. Same way that we defined it for the other algorithms.
So that's how the algorithm knows what type of classes to look for.
And then in terms of the outputs, again, these outputs are supervised.
If you remember based on the L2 norm, L2 loss of the ground truth boxes.
We're not telling anything in the query part what to or where
to look for any of the objects. The training, the process itself is back propagating.
If there are any losses, any errors, it back propagates the outputs.
So basically, we are not determining anything in the beginning or in this part.
So the question was the query is give me up to nine objects.
And yes that's basically what this means.
And through the self-attention and cross-attention, it will try to generate output tokens that
are turned into class and box coordinates through that FNN operation.
Your question is, if the query is over there, if they are image patches or not?
No, they are not image patches. They are just queries for trainable parameters.
You put them in to generate the outputs. For each of the inputs, you get the value as the output.
And that value is turned into class and box coordinates. Again, the question is, what is object queries?
They are trainable learnable parameters. So you initialize them. The network finds the best values for them.
And that's what you get as the output. The question is, if there is any intuition,
which FNN gets which box? The short answer to that is, no, there's nothing
that stops the network from-- I mean, we're not including anything
that stops the network from generating multiple. But remember, that there are so many self-attention
and cross-attention layers over there that they are actually interacting with each other
and makes each of those queries match with one of the output layer. So it's not generating the exact same thing as the output.
And we also have control over supervising those FNNs as well.
So your question is if there are image segmentations, pixel level segmentations as part of the training.
This algorithm does not require the pixel level segmentations.
It's only supervised based on class labels and bounding boxes. But if you have the pixel level segmentations,
you can always turn the pixel level segmentations into a bounding box to train this algorithm,
but it doesn't necessarily require that. So the question is, if it's possible to generalize
unseen objects. And by unseen you mean a new class label?
Yes. For these types of algorithms that they are fully supervised,
often, there is no way because you are creating class probability vector. There is no way of adding something
at the end for a new class without previously knowing
there is some other classes. So fully supervised networks, often, there is no new object.
We can have a background object or no object. As you can see, we have the label of no object.
But there are many algorithms and mixed extensions of these types of algorithms that are
used for zero-shot learning. Zero shot means understanding finding something new
without having an example of those in the training data. But it's beyond this topic.
What happens if you have more objects in the scene than what
you put in as the query? So that's a great question. It often generates the ones that has the highest confidence
on the objects, so bounding boxes with the highest confidence. And in those cases, you often want
to add more queries just so you can get more objects.
I'll be here to answer questions, if you have any after the class. But we have a bunch of other topics to cover,
and I want to make sure we go over them. At least you get familiar with the topics.
So with the object detections, now back to the question I was asked earlier,
how can we use those types of algorithms for instance segmentation?
And that's actually not too hard. We talked about this when we were
talking about R-CNN algorithms, where we run a CNN on the image.
Then we have a region proposal network that gives us the bounding boxes.
And those bounding boxes are turned into either class labels
and bounding box refinements. So this is what we've talked so far with R-CNN and so on.
Now, we can turn this into a mask R-CNN that also generates the mask.
So basically, same architecture that we talked about earlier. Now, we can take one more output, make it more multitask
and generate the mask predictions. So what we used to be doing before was,
again, image, region proposals, CNN, gives us class label
and the box coordinates. Now, we add another layer of convolution
that generates the masks for that object in the pixel level.
And that mask, again, could be the same size as the input and the image, and, basically, on the layer itself.
If we use fully convolutional neural networks, that's what we often get as the output. For each of the objects, when we have that tiny box,
we can always get the mask for that. The chair in different settings of the box itself,
if you have different boxes, the bed and the human,
the baby in the image. And this is an extension of the R-CNN algorithm,
which we call mask R-CNN. And with mask R-CNN, the results have been very, very good
in detecting different objects, different known objects that we
could train the algorithms for. And then there are so many APIs and open source versions
of object detectors that you can explore. There are some links and resources here,
but this all, basically, rounds up and summarizes some of the tasks that we wanted to cover.
And they are actually very important for you to understand these tasks. They have been core Computer Vision tasks.
Although these days, Computer Vision is very more advanced. They are not bound to these tasks.
But if you have industrial applications, for example, quality control of separating rotten tomatoes
and good tomatoes in an industrial pipeline. Then with Computer Vision, you need to be able to detect objects and then
classify them into good or bad. That's why it's important to still understand and know
these steps and pipelines and how to do them in real time. But now, there are larger scale models
that you are all familiar with. This summarizes the first part, the Computer Vision tasks
that I wanted to talk about. And the last piece that I want to spend 10 minutes on is around visualization and understanding.
Again, this has been a big lecture by itself. And in 2050, 60, until 2020s that the topic of computer
and even before that 2014, '13 the topic of visualizing neural networks has been very hot and very much--
it helped us gain understanding into what
the networks are learning. And I'm going to summarize some of those, the most important ones here that you may need
to use in your applications. But before that, let me go back to the linear classifier
that we talked about. We spent quite a lot of time on linear classifiers.
And with the linear classifiers, what we did was at the end, we said, if I look at the linear function, what the network is
learning, I can have a template for each of those classes. Like for example, for this car, you can always see a front facing car as a template.
We can do the same with neural networks. If I visualize one of the filters,
so here, we visualize the weights of the linear function. It was the visual viewpoint.
I can do the same with linear-- sorry with visualizing the filters in the neural networks.
So for each of the filters, the network is, for example, is learning something that is basically
some of the basic shapes, orientations, or simple shapes,
as you can see here. Although this visualization, we can only do it for the layers
that we have few channels. Like, for example, if we have three channels, I can put them in an RGB image and just visualize it.
But as you remember, in CNNs, that was not the case. In CNNs, we had different sometimes quite a few channels
in the middle layer, so it's not easy to visualize those in something that we can see. But that's what you basically see.
In earlier layers that we have fewer channels, we can visualize them and see the network is actually
learning some patterns. So it starts learning patterns. And then later stages, it gets more holistic and bigger
patterns as if we train--
sorry, if we run something that we call guided back propagation, we can also visualize those, but not as simple as this.
I want to highlight a couple of ways of understanding and visualizing the neural networks, which
are actually important. One is the concept of saliency.
So in many applications, it's very important for you to know which pixel matters.
For example, in a medical application, when you do a classification of tumor versus none,
you want to see which parts of that image is actually the tumor. Because if you want to automate this,
nobody cares about knowing if there is tumor or not. Everybody cares about where in the image the tumor is.
So in order to do that, simplest application is we train a network, a feedforward neural network that
generates the value or the class label doc. But what we can do is we can--
actually, before I showed you that, in this case, in order to train this network, what we've done was
we always took the derivative of the neural network, the weights,
sorry, of the loss or of the class score with respect to the weights in order to update the weights.
Now, what I need is for each pixel, I want to see how much changing the pixel value
would affect the dog score? What does this mean? What I explained is the meaning of the variation.
So this means that the meaning of basically gradient.
So if I take the gradient of the score with respect to now the pixel values, not the network weights
anymore, with pixel values, I can visualize those gradients. And visualizing those means that these
are the pixels that matter. In order to classify dog on this image,
those are the pixels that matter. So if I change the values of those pixels, the dog score will be changed.
Again, this is the basic meaning and definition of gradients that we've talked about.
So this is one way. If you run this on different objects
that you've trained in the network, then this is what you get.
So that's one way of understanding saliency. And it's very effective in many cases.
But sometimes it's not just about the pixel values all the way to the back.
You want to see for each of the classes how the activations work.
And this brings us to class activation maps or CAM algorithm, class activation mapping, CAM
or Grad-CAM that I'll talk about in two minutes, are one of the most and widely used
algorithms for understanding CNNs, and also could be used for other architectures too.
But for transformers, we have a much better way of making sense of those, which actually we
talked in the last lecture. So what happens is that for each of the convolution layers,
we often do pooling. And the pooling generates feature maps. The feature maps are then turned into scores.
And those scores with those values of the weights.
If we extend the math, basically, we simply can highlight the class scores in a weighted sum form.
And this means that we can trace back class predictions
all the way back to the feature maps and in specific locations of the space,
because convolution layers are always mapped to a space in the image space two.
We do convolution as the spatial consistency across all
of the operations can help us trace back all the way to the image space.
So anyways, we can look at the feature maps and see how the class activations,
each of these classes are actually impacting those locations in the image.
And with that now, if I do this multiplication of weights
versus the weights that we've learned on top of the feature values, we create some class activations.
And this means that I have a way now to go back to the image space, because as long as I'm in the convolution space,
I can go all the way back to the image and create these maps of, for example, for each of the classes
palace, dome, church, altar, and monastery,
we can have different class activation maps.
These are the weights. These are the pixels or areas of the convolution layer that have been driving the scores
for these specific classes.
It's the same for others, like class activation maps for one single object in different images.
But there is a problem with this. And that problem is that we can only apply this to the last convolution layer,
because this is the only way we can do it. We can only go to the last convolution layer.
The way that we did the calculations here. And in order to solve that problem,
there is one variant of the algorithm called Grad-CAM, so gradient-weighted class
activation maps. It's basically the same algorithm. We need to weight calculate the weights with respect to the--
we basically take one of the layers
that created some activation. In the class level, we compute the gradients,
instead of just calculating the multiplication between W and feature.
We go all the way back with the gradients and create a weight based on the gradients,
and then that is used instead of the weights, it's aggregate of all of the weights
and gradients up to that specific layer. And then we weight that with that.
And then we also use ReLU to pass the positive ones.
And then that could also be all the way shown in the image space.
So I talked about CAM, which was only applied to the last convolution layer.
If you want to-- but this is not possible because in most of the CNN algorithms,
we don't have just one convolution layer at the end. We always have some operations fully connected and so on.
So in order to be able to carry this class activation to the convolution layer, if there
is something else in the middle, we often use the gradients and basically weigh the maps with the gradients aggregates.
And then we can actually do the visualization. They create these heat maps for each of the objects.
So this was about CNNs. But we talked about transformers last week in the last lecture
that they inherently come with the activation maps. Do you remember that language matrix
that Justin showed, that for each of the output words, there is a tension weight for the input.
We can do that, the same thing for the pixels. For each of the outputs, we can create these maps
in the pixel space and visualize the features of the ViTs
in the pixel space. So basically, with ViTs and transformers, this is much easier. We already have a way to visualize
the attentions, the weights. But with CNNs, we often use Grad-CAM
or these types of algorithms. That said, I did this task that I
thought I wouldn't be able to, completing the topics I wanted to talk about today.
And next session, we'll have the lecture around video understanding.
Thank you.

I think at the beginning of the  course, we announced that we would have   a few guest lecturers, people who previously  taught the course, to come and give a single  
guest lecture about a topic that they're very  familiar with. And I'm very happy to announce   we have the first one of those lectures  today. So I'll introduce Dr. Ruohan Gao.
He is an Assistant Professor in the Department of  Computer Science at the University of Maryland,  
College Park. And he leads the Multisensory  Machine Intelligence Lab there. He was previously  
an instructor for CS231N from 2022 to 2023.  And this is while he completed his postdoc with  
Fei-Fei Li, Jiajun Wu, and Silvio  Savarese. So without further ado,   I'll leave it to Ruohan to  give the presentation today.
OK, thanks. Hello, everyone. So it's  really exciting to be back to the class  
of CS231N. And I'm Ruohan, just like [?  Zen ?] introduced. So as you can tell,  
I'm very interested in multimodal stuff. So  not only in vision, but also how we can make   use of other sensory modalities like audio,  tactile, or other modalities, just like us,  
humans, to perceive, understand, and  interact with this multisensory world.
But of course, vision is the most important  modalities. That's why we have this course,   deep learning for computer vision. And I'm sure up  to this point that you guys are very familiar with  
image classification. Given a 2D image like this,  how to give a label to see whether it's a dog,  
it's a cat, or it's a truck, a plane.  That's a 2D-based image classification. And from the last lecture, I'm sure you have  also learned some other tasks that you can  
do on images. Not only you can just assign a  single label to say it's a cat or not. Also,  
you can do semantic segmentation to segment the  picture into different portions, components,  
and also have some semantic meaning like  where is grass, where is cat, where is tree. And you can also put a bounding box on  top of the objects you detect in the image  
to see where the dog is, where the cat is,  and also do instant segmentation that you not   only want to know the categories, but also  for each category, if there are two dogs,  
I want to have a segmentation mask for each  category. That's instance segmentation.   So a lot of tasks, classification, recognition  tasks you can do based on 2D images.
But that's not the only thing that we can use  for computer vision system to do. And also,  
our world is not just static like this. So if we  look at this image, hopefully up to this point,  
you have learned a lot of tools that you can  train some models to this classify this is a  
living room. You also have tools. You have  learned that to put a bounding box to see  
that this is a dog, and this is a baby. And  also, you can even have a segmentation mask  
to send them out to see where those  objects you detect are in the image.
So today, we're going to focus on video  understanding. So more formally, what is video?   Basically, video is just like this 2D image plus  time. There is an extra time dimension. So now,  
we are tackling things not only in this  3D image but also now in 4D. We have this  
three times T. T is temporal dimension.  And H and W are the spatial dimension. Now,   we are considering this kind of image and the  videos as a volume of images of video frames.
So an example task is video classification,  just like image classification. So we are  
given a video like this. Some person is  running. We want to take this videos as  
input. And also we want to train some  model, a deep learning model. We want   to classify whether this person is doing  swimming or running or jumping or what  
actions that he is doing just based on  this temporal streams of video frames.
So also, we have from the previous lectures,  I'm sure you have already learned some loss   functions like cross-entropy loss. And you  can train an image classifier. Similarly,  
you can use the similar tools. You just train  a video classifier. You just get some features.   And you use the same loss functions  and train a video classifier. So now,  
the problem on video understanding is  that how can we get features of videos  
that you can apply the loss functions you  have learned from the previous lectures?
And also another kind of difference between image  classification and the video classification,   video understanding is that now the things,  the tasks you want to do might be a little bit  
different just from the previous example. For  image classification, usually, you care more  
about the scenes, the objects. You want to just  do a classification. What is the object category?
For videos, usually, just like  this example I'm showing here,   you only want to classify actions.  It's often actions where the person,  
what activities the person or some animals are  doing in the videos. That's what we care about  
usually in video understanding. So the nature of  things to recognize can be a little bit different.
And another problem that we want to be  careful about for video understanding is  
that videos are usually very big.  Well, when we talk about images,  
it's just like three times H times W.  It's a single matrix of some RGB numbers.
But now, if we consider videos, it's a  sequence of frames. It can be like 30   frames per second. So in movies, sometimes,  we can have even higher resolution and also  
temporal resolution video frames. And  so you consider a space to store videos.
For example, if we consider standard  definition videos, it can take about 1.5  
gigabytes per minute if we store this video.  If we consider even higher resolution,  
like 1920 times 1080. And now,  it takes like 10 gigabytes per  
minute. So it takes the gigantic space in  order to store this kind of video data.
And also, there is no way for us to  just fit this kind of data directly   to GPUs. If we just have the input, then  we have a lot of storage to store them,  
to store this kind of data. And also, there are  other things you have to store, like the weights,   the activations in your convolution neural  networks. So then, your model will be very huge.
And the solution-- what solutions we can have to  make videos smaller to make them processable? So  
one simple solution is that we just make videos  smaller. So although the high definition videos  
and also the original videos are long, we can  shrink things both temporally and spatially.
For example, for 3.2-second  videos like this, for example,  
we can maybe-- for each second,  maybe we don't need all the frames.   Let's just take five frames because there are  a lot of redundancies in the video frames.
If we take frames per second, and  also we just have a smaller spatial  
resolution like 112 times 112.  And now, we can make the videos   slightly smaller. For example, it's five 588  KB for this simple video. But definitely,  
we can also do larger resolution if  you have the compute, just like images. And also, how to train a model on these long  videos? Previous slide, I showed that we are  
training this video classifier on 3.2  seconds. But videos can be very long,   can be minutes, can be hours. So one way  that people do is that we train on clips,  
just like we train on chunks of this  video frames using a video classifier.
And what we do is that we train models  to classify short clips with some low  
fps, frame per second. And we just use a sliding  window. We sample a lot of different clips and use  
them as training data. And we train a classifier.  And then during testing, during inference time,   we just run the model on different clips.  We sample a few clips. We made 10 clips. And  
then we average the prediction results. And  that is our prediction for this long video.
And then what is a same post, like, video  classification model we can use? So I have  
mentioned basically video is just like a sequence  of images, a sequence of video image frames. So  
one simple thing that we just treat them as  images. That's the simplest tool we already  
have. We just run single frame convolution neural  networks because we already have all the tools.
We have learned that we can train an image  classifier. If we just take our image   classifier to just run on top of these  video frames and treat them as images,  
we can indeed get decent predictions.  Especially like a video like this. You   can see that there are not many changes across  videos. The person is running. Maybe there are  
some different movements on the body.  But generally, it looks pretty similar. Maybe you run an image action classifier. And  on every frame, maybe all of the frames will  
tell you it's running. And if you average  the prediction results from each image,   each video frame, then you will predict  running for this particular video.
So actually, also, it's usually a very, very  strong baseline for this simple image classifier,  
especially for video like this because  there are not too many changes across   videos. So if you are trying to design some  video classifier, you should always run this  
first because that's simple things to try. And  maybe you can already get pretty decent results.
So the question is, whether we just run single  frame or we run a chunk of frames? So for this, a  
simple single frame, say. And basically, we have a  video of 30 frames. Maybe you just maybe sample a  
few frames. And you just use the image classifier  to run on those sampled 10 frames and just treat   them as images. And you just directly average  the results. That's basically the per frame CNN.
So I think you have some very important  question is how to sample the frame?   That's the very key question. Because  we give you a-- I'm talking about we  
want to sample some frames and we want  to run a CNN on the frame. So how to get   those frames? So that is actually  also an active area of research.
One simple way is that you do random sampling.  You have a one-hour video. I don't know where the  
interesting part, where the important parts  are. We just sample maybe every one minute,   I sample one frame. And then I run an image  classifier. I average the results. But obviously,  
maybe this gives us some good results. But maybe  this is not the smartest way to do sampling. So there are other methods trying to  propose smarter sampling strategy.  
Maybe you can sample one frame. You can  then use that decision to decide where   else to sample. I actually also have some  examples later in the later lecture slides.
So this is a very, very simple video  classifier. Just like we just adopt   image classifier, a single frame CNN. And  similarly, just maybe we take one step  
further. Instead of directly just run single  frame CNN and average the prediction results,  
maybe we can do some fusion across the  features on using the single frame CNNs.
So this is often called late fusion. Basically,  the idea is that we still take some 2D CNNs.  
And we have some input, maybe key frames. And for  each frame, we use a 2D CNN. And then we extract  
some feature vector. And then we get maybe a  feature map of D times H prime times W prime.
And then because we have T frames. Then basically,   we have T feature maps. And then the simple  thing that we just flatten all the feature  
maps to vectors and then concatenate them.  Then we have a giant feature vector that  
basically contains all the information,  all the features across all the frames. And then what we can do, we can use  tools that we have learned like fully  
connected networks. We train an MLP  that maps this vector to some neural  
dimension. And then we train a classifier  on top of it to map it, to class score C.
So this is called late fusion. Because basically,  you can see that we extract the feature maps. And  
we process them very independently. And then at  the very late stage, we concatenate the feature   vectors and run some fully connected  layers to doing the classification.
So this is useful. But one drawback that  you can already probably tell from this  
example from my description is that this fully  connected layer, it's going to introduce a lot  
of parameters. Because if we concatenate  a lot of-- we flatten them across time.
And these feature vectors, depending  on how long how large T is, then you   can have a giant feature vector. And then  you use this giant feature vector. You want  
to map them into some lower dimension. And  then you have a very large, fully connected  
layers. And that will introduce a lot of  parameters. So it's not very efficient. So another way to do this is that  instead of concatenating them,  
we don't do concatenation. We don't  just use the giant feature vector,  
and then have a fully connected layer to  map them to scores. We can actually just  
do a simple pooling. Doing pooling, you don't  increase the length of the feature vector.
Basically, if you have some feature dimension  for a single frame and you pool across time,  
for these T frames, you're just  doing a pooling to do a temporal   aggregation. And then based on this clip  feature D, and then instead of D times T,  
you just still have a feature  vector of time D if you do pooling. And then you have a linear layer to map D to some  dimension C that matches the class score. And  
then you train the cross-entropy loss on top  of it. And that's also late fusion. But now,  
we are using pooling. And the  good side here is that now,  
you don't have to have a very large fully  connected layers. But the pooling can also  
get rid of information that may be important.  So that's the downside of this operation.
So the reason I'm calling late fusion-- the  important part is late. And when it's late,  
maybe there's some information that has already  been lost. So you have using this 2D convolution  
networks to process images. For example, as  shown in these red circles here. So what is  
very important to recognize this video is  actually the motion of this man's feet,  
right. It's moving up and down, up and down.  And you can maybe tell that he's running.
So if we just use a single 2D CNN  to process them independently as a  
2D image and extract some feature map and maybe  up to very late stage of the feature maps,  
it doesn't contain the information of this  movement of the feet of this man anymore at  
this very late stage. So some information of this  feet up and down is showing these red circles,  
which should be useful cues. But now,  it's not there in the feature maps. The intuition is that if you extract  features from the earlier layers,  
it's very close to the original video  frames. So there is a larger chance it  
will contain this low level information, this  movement from the video frames. And also,  
if you concatenate them or pool them, across  time, it will analyze the motion across time.
But because we are processing a lot of  convolution pooling up to a late stage,   you need-- even at the very late stage, it  contains more high level information like  
semantic information instead of this low  level motion information. So that's why   it's most likely it's not there. So  that's the downside of late fusion.
So instead of doing late fusion, we actually  we can do early fusion. So to do early fusion,   if we want to make use of the feature vectors  more closer to the actual video frames,  
we can just take this input and then we directly  reshape them to 3T times H times W. We just  
directly aggregate the information  temporally from the very beginning. And then we use some 2D convolution, the first  2D convolution layer, just directly map them  
to from channel dimensions 3T to D. Basically, we  use the 2D convolution to process this temporal  
information in the first layer to map the channel  dimension from 3T to D to process the video frames  
of all the information from the frames in the  very beginning of the convolution neural networks.
And the rest of the network  is then in standard 2 CNN. And   the only difference is that now, we destroy  and collapse all the temporal information  
using a single layer. And then the rest  is just like image classification. And   then you're doing this classification  using standard cross-entropy loss.
For each frame, we get features like D. And each  single frame will give you a feature D. So you  
have T. This feature vectors D. So for pooling,  we are pooling over the features. Basically,   we can do mean pooling to average the features  or be max pooling with max over the features.  
Then after that, we still get a feature that's D.  So it's pooling over the features not the frame.
So that's early fusion. So then, the  downside of the early fusion is that  
although we explicitly trying to handle  the motion from the early layer. But then,  
we are too ambitious. We're trying to  capture everything in a single layer.   We just concatenate all the frames and then  collapse all the [INAUDIBLE] information using a  
single convolution network. Maybe it's not  going to achieve what we want it to achieve.
So then, another solution is that instead of doing  late fusion or early fusion, maybe we should do  
something in between. That's slow fusion. That's  exactly what this 3D convolution neural network  
is doing. So the intuition is that we want to  use this 3D version of convolution and pooling.
We want to slowly fuse the information over the  course of the network. Instead of doing it at a   very late stage or at a very early stage, we  gradually shrink over temporal dimension and  
spatial dimension to get this 3D feature maps. So  that's the idea of 3D convolution neural network.
We just use 3D convolution and a 3D pooling  operation. So what is 3D convolution, 3D   pooling? So you have learned the 2D convolution.  Right. For 2D convolution layer. Basically,  
you take an image like this-- 32 times 32 times 3  image. And if you use 2D convolution, basically,  
you have learned that you can-- for  each kernel, you have this filter.
You can have this convolution kernel that  is maybe 5 times 5 times 3 that runs like  
a sliding window approach, just slides across  space and goes all the way in the depth dimension.  
So then for each computation, you map that to  a single value in that final activation maps.
And then finally, you obtain this  activation map of 28 times 28 times 1,  
in this case. You convolve over all spatial  locations and map this channel dimension,   the depths that-- go all the way over the channel  dimension, and then map from 3 to 1, in this case.
So that's 2D convolution. So the  difference is that for 3D convolution,   now, we just have one extra dimension. So  here, you can think of that-- here, the input  
is C times T times H times W. The extra thing is  this T dimension. That is a temporal dimension.
But what I'm showing here, because we can only  show things in 3D, we cannot show things in 4D.  
So there's actually one dimension that is not  shown here. That is a C dimension. The channel   dimension is not shown here. So you can think  of that for each grid point in this feature map,  
there are many features. There  are C features in that grid point.
And then for this 3D convolution, basically,  if we are talking about a 66 times 6 times  
6 convolution, because we have  one extra dimension. Instead of   slide over the spatial dimension just in  the H and W dimension over the images,  
now we are sliding over this cube. We are sliding  over this cube of dimension T times H times W.
So it includes both the spatial dimension and the  temporal dimension. And also, it goes all the way  
along the channel dimension. So then, gradually,  you can-- just like 2D calculus. The other part  
is just like the 2D convolution. It's  just we have this extra dimension. And then you get this 6 times 6 times  6 3D convolution. And maybe another  
layer of 5 times 5. And finally, after you  processed doing these 3D convolution operations,  
and you flatten the feature vectors, and  then you use a fully connected layers to   map them to the class scores. So that  is basically the idea of 3D convolution.
So let's walk maybe through some toy examples to  better understand it, to compare the early, late,  
and the 3D convolution neural networks. Just to  give you a flavor of how it works. In practice,  
actually, definitely, it's better-- can be  much larger and more complicated. But here,   I'm just trying to show that a toy  example to walk through the size of  
the feature maps and also the receptive  field to give you a sense about what's   the difference between early fusion and late  fusion and 3D convolution neural networks.
So for late fusion, you can think  of that, for example, in this case,  
maybe originally the input is 3 times  20. 20, the temporal dimension. And 64,  
64 is a spatial dimension. And you use a  2D convolution. Because we are doing late  
fusion. We don't do anything over the temporal  dimension initially. We just keep the 20,   the temporal dimension. We just build  up the receptive field spatially.
Now, we have a convolution 2D layer to  map the channel dimension from 3 to 12,   but just keep the temporal dimension 20.  And then gradually, maybe we use some  
pooling layers. Still, we didn't do anything  with the temporal dimension. So it's still 20.   But because of the pooling operation, we build  up the receptive field in the spatial dimension.
And then gradually, we maybe use another  2D layer. And now, the feature map is 24  
times 20 times 16 times 16. And we also gradually  increase the spatial receptive field, but it will  
still keep the temporal dimension 20. So we  didn't do anything over the temporal dimension. And finally, just using a single global  average pooling, we pull across the feature  
maps 20 times 16 times 16. So we pull over  both time in the spatial dimension. And now,  
we get from this 20 times 16 times 16. We get a  1 times 1 times 1 feature point. So basically,  
we collapse everything in the  final single layer. And we build   up the temporal receptive field in a  single layer. So that's a late fusion.
So then for early fusion,  what's the difference? So now,   instead of building slowly in  space or at once in time at N,  
now, we are building slowly in space and all  at once in time at the very beginning. So the  
input is still 3 times 20 times 64 times 64. But  now, we're just using a single conv 2D layer.
Now, we just treat this 3 times 20 as a  single-- the channel dimension. We just   map everything. There's 3 times 30. Just  treat all of them as channel dimension,  
and then map them to 12. So basically, we use a  single convolution layer, 2D convolution layer,  
to collapse all the temporal  information from the very beginning. So we build the temporal receptive field  in the first layer. So now, the temporal  
receptive field becomes from 1 to 20. And then  the spatial receptive field gradually builds  
up. And we use pooling and conv 2D to build  up the spatial dimension just as late fusion.
And finally, we use the global average  pooling. Now, with global average pooling   is only just trying to doing the averaging,  doing the pooling across space. So we build  
slowly in space, but all at once at the  very beginning. So that's early fusion. So then, what is the 3D convolution neural  networks? So for 3D convolution layer, basically  
we build slowly both in space and time. So  that's why we call it the slow fusion. So the  
input can still be the same 3-- times 20 times 64  times 64. But now, we are using 3D convolutions.
So in the first layer, we just-- to map things  from 3 to 12. But we also just keep the temporal  
dimension in this case. And then we build  up a little bit temporal receptive field   and a spatial receptive field. And then  we use a pooling layer. And then 4 times  
4 times 4 for pooling layer. And then we pull  a little bit of this temporal feature and also   spatial features. And then we further build up  both the spatial and temporal receptive field.
And we have another conv 3D layer, and  then to further build up the spatial and  
temporal receptive field. And finally, we're  using a global average pooling. But now,   we're pooling over these 4 times 16 times 16  feature map, and then to further increase the  
temporal and spatial receptive field. So we are  building up gradually in both space and time.   So that's the difference between early fusion,  late fusion, and 3D convolution neural networks.
So you can see that for the early fusion and  3D convolution neural networks. So both of them  
builds receptive fields over time. But what's  the actual difference? So let's look at it  
more closely here. So if we think of it as a  feature vector for each spatial grid point,  
so the common filter, if it's a 2D  convolution, for this grid point,  
it will consider all the temporal  dimensions. T is equal to 16.
So it is local in space but extends fully  in time. That's the filter in 2D convolution  
neural network. But what is the problem?  Think about it. So if we directly just go  
all the way through time dimension in this 2D  convolution, what problem is going to happen? So the shortcoming of that is that there will  be no temporal shift invariance. It's because  
the 2D, the filter, now extends fully in  time. So if we want to learn some global  
transition in color of different  time, for example, if we want to--   because it's a video. It's something that  we want to recognize temporal information.
If there are some changes from blue  to orange at different time step,   maybe there is some change that is happening  at time step 4. There's another same change  
that is happening at time step 15. But  it's the same change from blue to orange.
If we go all the way through time, the filter  extends fully in time, then if we want to learn  
the global transition at different times, then we  have to have a whole separate filter in order to  
learn this. So we have to learn a different--  this kernel in order to learn these different  
transitions across at different time steps.  So there is no temporal shift invariance.
So how to recognize this kind of blue to orange  transition just anywhere in space and time? Just  
like when we are doing image classification, we  want to have some spatial invariance. We want to  
be able to recognize the image contains a cat. No  matter where the cat is on the right corner left  
corner, we want to share the kernels to be able to  recognize things at a different spatial location.
Here, we want to be able to learn  these different types of motion,   different types of temporal patterns at different  temporal time steps. So that's similar idea. So  
then, that's exactly the benefit of 3D  convolution neural networks. Right now,  
instead of extends fully in time, in  this T dimension, originally for this  
early version T, extends all the way in  the temporal dimension T is equal to 16. But now if, T is equal to 3. And we can  slide over the temporal dimension. Just  
like we learned spatial invariance  using filter and local regions. Now,   this conv filter only spans a local window  in time and slide over in the time dimension.
So then, the benefit is that now, we can have some  temporal shift invariance. Because each filter  
slides over time. So we can reuse this filter to  recognize different motion patterns across these  
dimensions. So the transition from blue to orange  can now be recognized at every moment in time.
And then, the benefit of this is that we don't  have to have separate filters. Now, we are more  
representation efficient. We don't need to learn  separate filters anymore. So that's basically  
the main difference between 2D conv early  fusion and the 3D convolution neural network.
And also, in the last lecture,  I think, you have already also  
seen some examples of some tools that we can  use to visualize what we have learned in a 2D  
convolution neural networks. Similarly, we  can also visualize filters just for this 3D  
convolution networks as these video clips. You  can see that-- I'm not sure if you can see it.
The learned filters from the 3D convolution neural  networks, because now the filter extends both in  
space and time, so we can see that as a video  clip. And you can see that for these filters,  
some of them are just like those filters  you have seen for image classifier.
You can have this color patterns and also  these different edges. But you can also   see that there are some other filters. There  are some temporal transition from one corner  
to another or from some one edge pattern  to another. And some doesn't learn motion,  
and some maybe focus on just the color patterns.  But some learns motion in different directions.
So we can just visualize these kernels  like this to interpret them. Basically,  
two difference-- one is this slow fusion.  In terms of convolution operation, yeah,  
indeed, basically 3D convolution.  3D convolution, definitely. And 2D convolution, they are totally different.  You have another dimension of convolution. You  
have this temporal dimension. So the  difference is you have this temporal   dimension in the convolution operation. But  practically, you use 3D convolution neural  
networks. It gradually builds this  receptive field over space and time.
So we have talked about this tools, 3D  convolution networks or architectures.  
But what data we can use just like  ImageNet? Or what data we can use   to do video to train a video classifier? So  one example dataset, challenge dataset that  
people have been tackling is this dataset called  Sports 1 million, which was introduced in 2014.
So for this dataset, you can see what tasks  we can do. We can do very, very fine-grained  
sports category classification.  You can see here the blue shows,   the ground shoes. And yellow, it shows  the top five predictions. And the green  
shows the correct prediction. And the  red shows the incorrect prediction. You can see that the action  categories in the dataset is very,  
very fine-grain. There are 487 different  types of sports. There can be marathon,  
ultra marathon. Actually, I don't  know the difference between them,   but it's very [INAUDIBLE] to different  types of sports categories in this dataset.
And here are some results if we train these  different types of classifiers we have talked  
about on this Sports 1 million dataset. So  one very shocking results you can probably  
see here is that for this single frame model  that I asked you to try, if you want to develop  
some video classification model, is that  it actually has a very good performance.
You can see that the single frame model, if you  just treat it as an image classifier, it actually  
gives you 77.7 classification, top five accuracy.  And for the early fusion we talked about,  
it actually has a slightly worse performance. And  for late fusion is slightly better. And if we use  
3D convolutional neural networks, in this case,  on this dataset, it gets like a 2% to 3% boost.
So the takeaway message here is that,  definitely, you should try the single   frame model. [INAUDIBLE] actually works pretty  well. But the 3D convolution neural networks--  
I showed here is the 3D convolution neural  network used in 2014. But over the past 10 years,  
we have seen a lot of advancements.  So the numbers are also getting much,   much better, as I'm going to  talk about in the later slides.
For both training and testing, it's  just treating videos as images and   train an image classifier. That's exactly  what a single frame is doing. Basically,  
if I understand question correctly,  it's using image classifier. But it's   training on a lot of frames on videos.  It's not a single frame in each video.
And also, because this dataset is a  huge dataset. Because like I mentioned,   videos are very huge. When people sharing  video datasets, we cannot just share them  
just like ImageNet. People can download from,  some database because videos are really huge. Like  
this dataset has maybe 1 million videos. It's not  very doable to download all of them, to share it.
Actually, this video actually, originally, when  it was released, is shared as a list of URLs,  
YouTube URLs. But one thing you can expect  from this YouTube video URLs is that people  
modify their videos and delete their  videos. And so that original list maybe   have 1 million videos. But now, I guess,  maybe half of the videos are already gone  
or maybe not there. So this dataset is  not very stable because of this reason.
So like I mentioned, 3D convolution neural  networks have been improving gradually since  
May 2014. So one early popular version of  this 3D convolution network is this model  
called [? C3N ?] network. So basically,  it's actually very simple. Basically,  
it's very similar to the VGG architecture  we use for 2D image classification.
But now, we just convert things to three-dimension  convolution neural network. And for example,  
for the 3D CNN, you use 3 times 3 times  3 conv and 2 times 2 times 2 pooling.  
And except maybe for the first layer, it has  some changes. So the overall architecture is  
very similar to VGG architecture. It's  now just we have this extra dimension.
And so that's why it's called the  VGG of 3D CNNs. And the model,  
it was trained on this Sports 1 million dataset  said that I just mentioned, and because it  
was introduced like in 2014. And at that time,  imagine that you want to train such a model.  
It needs a lot of compute because not too many  people have access to a lot of GPUs at that time.
So actually, this model was trained at Facebook.  And they released this model, the pre-trained  
weights, they train the 3D model on Sports 1  million, and then they released the feature  
pre-trained model as a feature extractor.  So many people actually who cannot afford   to train a video model themselves, they actually  started to use this model as a feature extractor.
So they can just take a video  and extract features from this  
using this pre-trained model. So a  3D model, and then maybe train some   other linear classifier. So people start  to use it. That's why it got popular.
So the question basically is about what we're  talking about, [INAUDIBLE] classification about   how many frames we should take as input in  terms to extract the features? So basically,  
for all these models we are talking about,  we assume that we are just passing a clip,   a predefined length, like 16 frames or 32 frames  to train a single model that always takes 16  
frames or 32 frames as input. And there are other  techniques we can talk about, how we're going to  
aggregate this clip level prediction. But for now,  we're just doing clip level feature extraction.
So the downside of this 3D CNN is that it's  very computationally expensive. Basically,  
we just directly, in a brute force way,  we just make this VGG style from 2D to  
3D. And you can see that for AlexNet. For this  GFLOP, basically, what it means is that it's  
like gigaflops. It's trying to measure how  many floating point operations you need for  
a single forward pass, basically just trying to  measure whether the network is efficient or not. So for AlexNet, it takes 0.7 GFLOPS. For  VGG-16, it takes like 13.6 GFLOPS. But for C3D,  
you are actually doing this kind of mapping from  2D to 3D. And now, it takes like 39.5 GFLOPS. So  
it's 2.9 times VGG, so it's not very efficient.  So that's the downside of this kind of network.
And if we look at the performance on  Sports 1 million, this is just 360 now,  
gets about 4% gain in terms of top five  accuracy. So this is just one example  
of the 3D convolution network we can do.  But there definitely can be other things   right. We are talking about a lot of tricks  that we can do for 2D image classification.
We can have this residue connections like  you have seen in ResNet. But definitely,   we can also do that just to improve, say, 3D  to adding some residual connections or other  
techniques we talked about in 2D convolutions.  And indeed, there are also a lot of work on   trying to improve this, different types of  video architectures, and also papers on that.
But apart from that, let's think maybe a little  bit more on whether we should treat space and  
time in a separate way. Because that, indeed,  very different things-- spatial information,  
temporal information. So maybe  we should actually explicit,   try to model things that exists  there temporally. That is motion.
So humans actually can do incredible  job processing motion. So maybe  
take a guess what actions the  humans are doing here in this   simple video/ You can say it out  if you want. What's this? Sitting.
Yeah, just from these very- few points, you  can actually do a good job just to recognize  
what actions that this person is  doing or maybe two persons. Now,  
there are not any appearance information.  Just a few points. Just motion.
We can actually have a very good  understanding about some activities   that is going on in these videos. So that's  why how we process appearance and motion  
might be very different. Maybe we should have  separate networks to process them. So indeed,  
that's kind of motivation for this  work that was introduced in 2014.
And they are trying to propose a two-stream  network to process appearance information and  
the motion information separately. So basically,  one way to explicitly measure of motion is to use  
this concept called optical flow. So for  optical flow, basically, the idea is that  
we want to measure the motion, the changes of  the motion, of the pixels in adjacent frames.
Basically, for the first frame, for every pixel,   how it's going to move in the second  frame. So it calculates the velocity  
for points within the frames and provides  an estimation of where the points could be   in the next frame, a sequence. For example,  in this case, like for frame T and p plus 1.
Basically, this flow field, here are two  dimensions, and tells where each pixel will  
move in the next frame. So F(x, y) is equal to  (dx, dy). And then the I t plus 1 (x plus dx),  
that's where the pixel, E, in the next frame  and is equal to I t (x, y) in the current frame.
So it's a way to measure, explicitly measure  motion of the pixels. So there are many papers  
actually on doing research and also how to  actually compute optic flow given a pair of   frames. There are ways to make different types  of assumptions. Some work assume the optic flow,  
just assumes brightly stays constant as things   move. And then trying to propose some  techniques to compute this optic flow.
But once you get it, it basically  captures the motion information   for two adjacent frames. And also, these  are two dimensions because it's trying to  
capture how pixels move horizontally  and vertically. So you can actually also  
visualize it separately. You can visualize  it the horizontal motion, horizontal flow,   dx. And also you can visualize the vertical  flow dy. You can see that it captures some  
horizontal motion, the vertical motion. So we  capture this kind of low level motion cues.
So once you have a way to capture this  kind of motion cues as optical flow,   then people trying to propose two-stream networks  to train a motion classifier and appearance  
classifier. So this is a famous two-stream network  for action recognition. So basically, it has a one   single frame model that's doing appearance  classification to tell what action it is.
And then you have a separate stream. That's the  temporal stream ConvNet that takes this multiframe  
optic flow. For every two adjacent frames,  it computes the optical flow map. And also,  
it separately treats the horizontal motion  optical flow and vertical flow. And then stack  
them together. And then they process them using  a temporal stream convolution neural network. And then you make a prediction. And  then they aggregate the prediction  
results for both the motion stream  and the appearance stream to get the   final prediction. So that's the  idea of this two-stream network.
And it actually works pretty good. It's on  another dataset called UCF-101. There are  
101 action categories in this dataset.  So you can see that-- one surprising   thing you can see that is using only motion  actually works very well, surprisingly well.
You see the performance of 3D convolution network  and spatial only. And that's only the appearance  
string. And the temporal only, that's the  motion stream. You can see that the motion   stream actually works much better compared to  the spatial only stream, the appearance stream.
So my hypothesis is that it's less easier  to overfit. Because for the motion,  
there are a lot of background information,  which may be not important for the background,   for the action classification.  But for the motion stream,  
it actually contains the key  information, the movements,   which are less easier to overfit. Actually,  you can get better results on this dataset.
So, so far, we have been talking about short  term structures in videos. And also earlier,  
I think folks asking about how many  frames we should use actually to do  
the classification? So definitely,  it's very important to modeling the   long-term temporal structure to  recognize more distant in time.
So we already know actually. I already  have the tools to handle sequences  
to use recurrent networks, to process a  sequence of words to doing some caption  
tasks and some prediction tasks. So we can also  use similar tools, just recurrent neural networks.
We just have a convolutional neural networks. No  matter whether it's a single frame convolutional  
networks to get a 2D feature vector or use a 3D  convolution network to get a feature vector from  
a clip. But you have a much longer video. We  can get a feature vector, and then we just use  
the RNs or LSTMs we have talked about, to  model the long-term temporal structure.
We just process the local features using this  recurrent networks and make a final prediction  
at the last time step if we want to do  a single video level classification,   where we're just doing a many to one output  at the end of the video. And we can also do  
one to one mapping like we talked about. So for each frame, we can make a prediction.  Maybe there are some predictions we want to make  
for each video frame. And we can also get this  output from LSTM or recurrent neural network.
And actually, this kind of idea has already been  explored in 2011. Actually, that's way ahead of  
its time. Because AlexNet was introduced in 2012.  So, but it's more popularized by this 2015 paper.
So if you want to train this kind of  recurrent architectures for modeling  
long-term temporal structure, you can often  only backpropagate through this [INAUDIBLE]. Or  
you can fuse the CNNs. You can  pre-train them on some clips,   on image classification. And otherwise, you  have a huge network with recurrent part,  
this convolution part. It's very hard to  train them end to end. So you can just use  
it [INAUDIBLE] 3D as a feature extractor  and train this recurrent neural networks. And we have already seen two approaches to model  the temporal structure. How about we can combine  
these two approaches, This convolution neural  networks and this recurrent neural network.  
Both of them has some advantages. So we  can maybe just combine them in a single  
architecture to process this video data. So indeed, we can take some inspiration from  this multi-layer recurrent neural networks we  
have talked about. So each timestep can take  these previous hidden timestep from the same  
layer, and also the output from  the same timestep from the previous   layer. That's basically the  idea of this multi-layer RNN.
But similarly, we can just do it for videos.  Now, we introduce this recurrent convolution  
neural networks. It's very similar. It's just now,  we build this grid of features, where each one is  
a three-dimensional vector. Like two spatial  dimension, and the one is a channel dimension.
So each feature vector, it's like the  fourth dimension C times H times W.  
So each depends on two inputs for  each vector. For each feature map,   it depends on the feature map from the  same layer by the previous timestep. But  
it also depends on the feature map from  the previous layer but the same timestep.
So you record in 2D convolution network,  where we just map this feature map from  
some input feature to an output feature. But  here for this recurrent convolution network,  
we can just use as input these two 3D tensors.  One from the same layer and previous timestep,  
and one from the previous  layer at the same timestep. So you recall that the recurrent network, you have  this form of it has some hidden layer feature map,  
ht minus 1. It takes the input of this current  timestep, have some function with some parameter  
W. And then process the new state feature  vector ht. That's basically the key of RNN.
So now, instead, we just change these  vectors forms of RNN. We just replace  
all this matrix multiplication in recurrent  neural networks with 2D convolutions. Now,  
we get this recurrent convolution neural  networks. So we have the feature map. You do 2D convolution instead have this  matrix multiplication. We get another  
feature map. And also for features from  the previous layer, the same timestep,   also do this. And then after doing this  2D convolution, we add them together,  
use another tanh layer, and then we get the  feature map for the current hidden layer.
So that's basically the idea of recurrent  convolution neural network. Basically, we   can combine convolution operations and recurrent  
operations. And we can also actually do this  for any kind of recurrent neural network   variants like GRUs and LSTMs, maybe you  have already learned from previous class.
And so now, we can successfully combine  the benefits of the two. We have this both  
spatial and temporal fusion inside this recurrent  convolution neural network. But this model was not  
used too much because there's one large downside  of recurrent networks, which you may have already  
learned that RNNs are very slow for processing  non-sequence. And videos are usually very, very,  
long, and you have to be process them in parallel.  But RNNs are very hard to be parallelized.
But there's another important model we have  learned, I think in the previous lectures,  
what we can do. We can also use operations  like the self-attention to process videos. For  
self-attention, you have this queries, keys,  and values. And you can use self-attention  
layer as a standalone operation to process  images. Here, we can also do it for videos. And one very large advantage of self-attention  is highly parallelizable. And all the alignment  
and these attention scores for all the inputs can  be done completely in parallel. So indeed, people  
are trying to use self-attention also in videos.  So they just pause self-attention directly to 3D.
Maybe you have some 3D convolution  neural network. You get some feature   map like C times T times H times W. And  then similarly, you can get some query  
feature maps. You can use some 1 times  1 times 1 3D convolutions to change the  
channel dimension to map them to query feature  map that is C prime times T times H times W. Similarly for keys, you get this feature map  for values, get this feature maps. And then you  
want to get some attention weights. Basically,  you're doing some transpose of this feature map  
from queries. And the vectorized multiplication  get a attention score for each query and key  
feature pair. And then you can get this attention  map and then use it to condition the values.
And you can get another value, a feature map.  And then you can map them. Use another 1 times  
1 times 1 convolution to map them back  to the same dimension C so that it can   be concatenated with the original feature input.  So that is a residual connection. So in total,  
you can see that it's very similar  to the self-attention operations. But now, we move things to 3D. And this  is one block that is very independent.  
It can stand on its own. So you see in  this paper, it's called nonlocal neural  
network. It introduces block, and call  it a nonlocal block. You can use it as  
a building block for processing  videos, to do video understanding. For example, you can just add this  on nonlocal blocks into existing  
3D convolution neural network architectures.  And to have some 3D CNN on a nonlocal block,  
and another block of 3D CNN add on a nonlocal  block. And each nonlocal block, basically,  
is very powerful to fuse across both space and  time, and finally, into this classification.
So the one thing we haven't talked about is  what is this 3D convolution neural network?   So what we should use here? So a  very interesting idea that people  
have explored in the past that can is,  can we reuse the 2D convolution neural   Network many successful architectures we have  talked about or have learned, directly to 3D.
We just do some inflation of this 2D networks. So  then, we can get a 3D convolution neural networks.  
So for this work, it's called I3D architecture.  The idea is that they just take a 2D CNN  
architecture. They replace each 2D conv pool, the  layer that originates of dimension Kh times Kw.
But now, we replace with a 3D version, that is a  Kt times Kh times Kw, just inflated basically. And  
they use it on top of the inception block. And  then after they're doing this inflation, then  
you have an architecture for processing videos,  directly just reuse the existing architectures.
And now, we can transfer the architecture  that works pretty well in 2D to work  
also in 3D. But taking one step  further, people also have been  
trying things that not only we can transfer the  architectures. But actually, we also can transfer   the weights. Because we have already pre-trained  a lot of architectures models on image datasets.
Maybe we can actually reuse the weights  we have learned there. There are maybe   some good prior information. So one thing  you can do is that you can just initialize  
the inflated CNN with weights trained on images. For example, you have maybe for one-- originally,  you have this 2D conv kernel. You just copy the  
kernel by Kt times. And you divide it by Kt.  And originally takes one single image as input.
Now, you take this video of 3 times Kt times H  times w as input because we have divided them  
by Kt. And you just use this inflated version  and copy the weights by Kt times. And then you  
will get the same output if you just input a  single frame or a video of constant frames.
So now, we have a way to recycle this existing 2D  image based on this architecture and weights from  
2D image understanding. And actually, it works  pretty well. So if you look at the performance,  
you inflate them. Compared to this two-stream  convolutional network, it actually has better   performance. And you can also inflate  actually not only the appearance frame.  
You can also inflate a motion stream. So  it actually gets some further improvements.
Basically, this is just like a technique you  can do to reuse this kind of independent from   the 3D convolutional networks. You can build  this non-local blocks, this part. And what I'm  
trying to say is that we have a lot of 2D  convolution neural networks, the weights.
Successful people have shown that they are  very successful. And if we want to reuse them,  
people have shown that they can actually  copy the weights and reuse their weights,  
directly use them to operate on videos. So  that basically, that's the high level idea.
And after doing this initialization, you can  still fine tune on the video data. But you have  
the pre-trained weights from images. So then,   we can give you some good initialization  for training the video models. So this  
idea of this I3D network basically is trying  to copy the weights and doing the inflation.
So this is also just one example of this  video understanding net model. And there  
are also many other video transfer model  proposed for video understanding. That is,  
for example, this work, space-time   attention is trying to do more factorized  attention to attend both space and time.
And also, there are some other methods trying to  be more efficient in terms of this transformer   architecture. Or this mask autoencoder you have  heard about doing more efficient, scalable video,  
video level pre-training to doing video  understanding. So I'm not going to talk them  
here in the class. But if you are interested,  you can check out their papers. Because there   are also many progress has been made to  have better media understanding models.
And if you look at the performance of  progress that way, I think we started   from a single-frame model 62.2 on this--  this is another dataset, Kinetics-400.  
It's a large video dataset. And then, you can  see that for this video model encoder, now,  
it already gets to 90% accuracy. So there are some  other-- new transformer model has been proposed.
So we are doing very well on classifying the  videos. And similar to the image classification  
in the last class, we can also use similar  tricks for visualizing video models. So we can  
take in this two-stream network as an example.  We can randomly initialize a appearance image  
and the flow image doing-- we are doing a  forward pass, and then compute the score.
And then we can back propagate with  respect to the score of a particular   class and using gradient ascent to maximize the  classification score. Just like what we're doing  
the visualization for the image-based  model. So then, it's this way that we  
can visualize doing some visualization,  interpretation of what has been learned. So the left is the optimized image for appearance  string. Maybe it's hard to guess what is maybe  
happening in the visual stream. On the right,  it's optimized image for the flow stream. One  
has some temporal constraints to prevent the  temporal stream to change too fast. So you  
can capture slow motion. And the other captures  right motion. So you can guess what the action is.
And maybe in this case, it's pretty clear. So what  action is this. So this is a weightlifting. You  
can see that-- the middle one is doing some  bar shaking. And the right one is doing some  
pushing overhead, the motion. So it's  indeed actually-- you can see that this  
video model is actually-- which models  are learning something about this motion,
So so far, I have been talking about how we  can classify these short clips-- the swimming,  
running. But another very important thing  is that how we can-- other task is that  
this is called temporal action localization  is that not only we want to just doing clip  
level or a classification. Sometimes, we want to  localize, just we want to do object detection.
Now, we want to localize where in the video  the action is happening. Maybe sometimes the   person is running. Sometimes, it's jumping.  So there is another task. This is another  
class called temporal action localization.  You can also use similar ideas from faster  
R-CNN. You can just generate some temporal  proposals and then doing the classification.
And also, you can also do both. This is  a spatial temporal detection. Basically,  
you want to localize not only in space but also  in time. Where the action is happening in space.   Where the action is happening temporally. So this  is another task called spatial temporal detection.
So so far, I have been talking  about the temporal stream and  
the architectures we can use to do  3D CNN, two-stream neural networks,  
spatial-temporal self-attention. And we have  already talked about some tools to do that.
But yeah, maybe in the final 10 minutes,  let's just revisit. I hope to finish  
in time. Let's revisit the  example that we started today,   where I showed you a video. But that's  still maybe not the full picture.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK] [BABY LAUGHING]
[DOG BARKING] [END PLAYBACK] So we are looking at video.  I think video understanding,   there is another very important dimension that  we have never covered until now. That is this,  
there is sound. There is audio. There  is other modalities in videos. If we   miss that ingredient, you lose a lot of  fun. There's emotions you can perceive.  
There's another interactions you can do  if you combine this visual and motion. So if we have this audio in mind  and we have this vision stream,  
then people also have proposed many  other interesting tasks. And also,   we have explored other tasks to doing video  understanding. Here's another example that  
in videos that maybe there are some  multiple objects, multiple speakers. And you can actually-- one task, example  task that I also personally have explored  
in the past with a visually-guided audio  source separation. And you can actually   understand trying to process things visually and  acoustically. You can use the visual information  
to guide the source separation. You want to  separate the sound components. Originally,   maybe there's a mixture. You want to  use the visual information to separate  
into some sound components. This is called  visually-guided audio source separation. So just to give you an example for this task.  For example, here is a speech mixture. Maybe  
sometimes, you want to hear the sounds for  each person individually. And then we can use   their visual information, audio information  to process them together, to separate their  
sounds. So here is what we can do. We can  separate the voice for the left speakers. So only we can do this for people, for  speech. When we have to process audio and  
speech and the visual stream. But we can  also do this for other types of sounds,   like music instruments. Here's another  example. We can even do musical instruments  
separation by analyzing the motion,  the object-centric information with   the audio stream and doing the separation.  So this is another example for this task.
And also, once we introduce this  new modality of audio, we just want   to do video understanding classification.  Audio can also be useful cues. So indeed,  
there are other work, audio-visual  video understanding work proposed   from transformer attention-based models, not  only we want to map images, videos to patches.
But also, map those audio spectrum to patches  and use some transformer architectures to   doing the classification. Or even, we  can do some mask autoencoder style. We  
want to predict the patches for the images and  also spectrograms doing video understanding.
And also, another aspect people have  been exploring is how to do efficient  
video understanding. So I will just quickly give  some examples. So here, throughout this class,  
I think I'm mainly focusing on clip level  classification. Just giving a clip, how to doing  
this classification. And after we classify a lot  of clips and we want to aggregate the information  
to get a video level predictions. That's  action recognition in long videos. So for efficient video understanding,  why we would want to do efficient video  
understanding? Because videos are very  long. We cannot afford to process every   clip one by one. So that we're trying to  increase the efficiency for a single clip  
just to building like this X3D is trying to  build better 3D convolution neural network.
But also, that we're trying to-- like this SD  sampler, trying to predict which clips are the  
most useful. And then you can only combine the  predictions. Only run your clip classifier on  
those important clips. And also, they are doing  policy learning, trying to predict which modality  
we should use in order to doing this action  classification we can select, or whether we want   to use video, or how many video clips, or whether  we want to use audio or other sensory data.
So here's one example that we can also  use audio, as a preview mechanism,  
to predict where are the important  moments. And then we use that  
as a guiding clue to process the clips and  to average the results. So that's about the  
efficient video understanding. So  that's also one area of research. And also, nowadays, there are people moving  to VR and AR, the smart glasses. And also now,  
in the future, I'm guessing there are a  lot of egocentric video streams. That's   another aspect of video understanding. So  not only you have this egocentric videos,  
but you also have this multi-microphone,  microphone array, multi-channel audios.
So how to doing better under video understanding   from this egocentric multimodal egocentric  video streams is also a hot topic. Maybe  
we have explored that we can use processes  video streams, the audio, multichannel audio,  
and visual information to predict who is speaking  to whom and who is listening to whom. Imagine,  
in the future, you wear these smart glasses.  You want to use it to help you to understand   these different types of social interactions.  So that's an egocentric video understanding.
So my final slide, definitely, LLMs right now,  
there are also a lot of ongoing work  trying to build video level foundation   models. How to collect the video understanding to  LLMs? So indeed, there are works trying to just  
map the videos to tokenize them and map them to  the LLM embedding space and maybe prompt the video  
foundation model-- where the person is--  what the person is doing in the video. And then you output some text to describe  the videos. So there are many work trying  
to collect video understanding, LLMs.  So that's also a hot topic right now.

Welcome back to CS231n lecture 11. Today, we're going to talk about large-scale distributed training.
And this is a pretty exciting topic, because this is basically how all neural networks get trained in practice today. When you look at large models from startups, from industries,
even in academia, really large-scale is the new norm in deep learning nowadays. And that's actually something that's
changed quite a lot in the last 10 years since we started this class. 10 years ago, it was actually pretty
common to train all models basically on one GPU, one device, and it was fairly uncommon to train on multiple devices.
But as we'll see nowadays, the new norm is to train models on tens, hundreds, thousands, even tens of thousands of devices concurrently.
So we need to develop new algorithms and new ways of thinking in order to do that.
And as a bit of running example through today's lecture, we're going to be talking a lot about Llama3-405B,
not because this is the best model or the most interesting model, but because this is a model that this is a fairly close to state-of-the-art model that actually shares a lot
of the implementation details of how it was trained, the model architecture, everything like that. There's a lot of really amazing, powerful models
that have been trained in the last couple of years, from Google, from OpenAI, from Anthropic, from others. But basically they don't share any details whatsoever
about their models anymore. There's a very famous quote that marked a sea change in the industry to me that was in the GPT4 paper back in 2023.
So when they released the GPT4 model, they said, "Given both the competitive landscape and the safety implications of large-scale models like GPT4, this report,
meaning the paper they wrote about GPT4, contains no further details about the architecture, including model size, hardware, training compute,
data set construction, training method, or similar." And that's basically the news. That's basically been the state-of-the-art for large-scale
models the last three years since GPT4. They don't tell you anything about anything. They'll tell you nothing about the model.
You'll be lucky if they'll tell you it's a transformer. They might tell you that much. So Llama3 is notable, not because it's
the best model out there, but because it's one of the most open models out there. So this is a large language model that was trained by Meta
and released open source about a year ago, in April 2024. And unlike OpenAI, the paper actually
does share a lot of the details about the model training. Not too much about the data set, a lot about the system infrastructure that was used to train it.
So this is something that we-- and this gives us a peek into how large-scale LLMs are
actually trained these days. And by the way, there is a new Llama4 model that just came out from Meta last month, April 2025.
So there are slightly better models out there in open source already, but there's no paper on Llama4 yet.
So I'm excited to read that one hopefully when it comes out in a couple of months and see what can we learn from the new generation of Llama
training. But just as a running example through today's lecture, we'll be pointing out a lot of examples from the Llama3-405B model for this reason.
OK, so there's basically two things that I want to talk about today. One is a bit about GPU hardware, and the other
is how to train on lots of GPUs. So I want to give you a sense both of what actually is the hardware that these things execute on,
as well as the algorithms that we need to use in order to train on a lot of them. So first, we're going to talk a little bit about GPU hardware.
So GPU, for those of you that don't know, is Graphics Processing Unit. These were specialized coprocessors
that were originally developed for computer graphics. And they turned out to be very useful generalizable parallel processors.
It's actually very fitting to be giving this lecture in this room, because this is the Huang auditorium.
Jen-Hsun Huang is the CEO and founder of NVIDIA, which is the biggest company right now
and has been for the last couple of decades in producing GPUs, both for gaming and for ML.
So these things started off basically for graphics. Because if you think about it, when you're doing computer graphics, you need to generate a lot of pixels on the screen.
You need to process lots of little pieces of primitive geometry to produce those pixels. So it's very natural to do a lot of computation all in parallel
when you're doing computer graphics. So people quickly figured out that this hardware that
had been built, intended to use in computer graphics could actually be used for much more general pieces of parallel computation as well.
So in the early days in the early 2000s, researchers figured out how they could contort these graphics
cards into doing generalizable parallel programming. And then moving on towards the end of the 2000s
and into the 2010s, NVIDIA really picked up this and developed these things, marketed them,
built them with the intention of being generalized parallel processors. They didn't quite know at the time what exactly they were
going to be used for, I think. I think they had this general idea that parallel processing was going to be important, and they really capitalized on deep
learning when it started to take off in the early 2010s. Much to NVIDIA's credit, I think they really realized
the potential of this research area very early, even in the early 2010s and started putting a ton
of resources into making sure that their hardware was really useful for deep learning training. And it's basically been the main way
that people train large scale deep learning models for more than a decade now. That's starting to change, as we'll see a little bit,
but their chips are the main one that people use.
So I always like looking inside these things and seeing what's in them. So this is a picture of the NVIDIA H100,
which is the mainstay of deep learning training right now, today. There's a next generation that just came out,
but it's not really accessible yet. I haven't trained anything on it yet. So this is the state-of-the-art right now.
Inside this NVIDIA GPU, inside this H100 GPU in the middle here are these compute cores.
And surrounding that are 80 gigabytes of HBM memory, high-bandwidth memory. So you can see the memory is separated
from the compute cores. They need to move. They need to talk to each other over this bus to move data back and forth from the GPU memory into the cores.
And it can do that at a speed of about 3 terabytes per second, which is a lot of bits moving around.
Now, if we dive deeper inside the GPU cores, we see that in the middle in that compute core part,
we've got a smaller piece of memory, about 50 megabytes of L2 cache that is much, much smaller than the 80 gigabytes of HBM memory.
But it's very, very close to the actual computing elements. So they can be accessed much more quickly from the compute cores.
And then the real heart of the thing are these 132 Streaming Multiprocessors or SMs.
These are independent parallel cores. They're a little bit more powerful in some ways than a typical CPU core,
because they can do a lot more parallelism. But they're a lot weaker than a typical CPU core also in a lot of ways, because they tend
to have slower clock speeds. They can't do as much instruction prediction, as much branch prediction. So it's really hard to make exact apples
to apples comparisons between these GPU cores and the CPU cores. But I usually think of these streaming multiprocessors
as roughly akin to a CPU core. Also, I know someone's going to go back home and actually
count all the little boxes on this screen, and you'll see that there are actually 144 of them and when I've said there's only 132.
Why is that? It's because all GPU hardware uses a process called binning, where making these things, they have so many transistors, so
many little computing elements. No matter how much money they pour into the process, they just don't come out perfectly. Some of them always end up a little bit messed up.
So they plan for that in the development of their products. And they say, we're going to try to make a chip. The full chip in theory has 144, but none of the chips
are perfect. But we know we'll get a reasonable number of those that have at least 132 that are functioning.
So they tend to use this process of binning. So then they actually only can sell a much more larger proportion of the chips
they tried to produce by only promising that 132 of them
will be turned on. Then we can dive even deeper inside one of those streaming
multiprocessors. And then we can see even more what's going on inside of these GPUs. So this is just one of the 132 active streaming
multiprocessors inside an H100. And there's a couple interesting elements in here to look at. First, we see we have 256 kilobytes of L1 cache
and register files. So this continues the trend of the memory hierarchy in the GPU. We saw that in general, you thought you
were learning deep learning? You're actually learning computer architecture. Sorry, it's a surprise. And it turns out that memory hierarchy
is really important for deep learning and for all kind of high performance computing. And the general trend is that you
have larger bits of memory that are farther away from the compute cores. And the closer you get to the compute cores,
you have smaller bits of memory but are much, much faster. And it's really important to write-- well, if you're writing the low-level algorithms that
run on these things, it's very important to be aware of this memory hierarchy and to be very diligent in passing
data between different phases of this memory hierarchy. And if you're writing performance GPU kernels, you spend a lot of time trying to optimize that.
So just to give you a flavor of that, we see the three levels of memory hierarchy in the H100.
You've got 256 kilobytes of L1 cache, 50 megabytes of L2 cache,
and then 80 gigabytes of HBM memory. So those are the three primary levels of memory hierarchy in the H100.
Then we've also got 128 of these FP32 cores. These are little arithmetic units
that can do generalized floating point operations. And in particular, each one of these 128 FP32 cores
can compute ax plus b, where a, x, and b are all scalars. It can perform that bit of computation in one clock cycle.
So then if you add this all up, that ax plus b is basically 1 multiply 1 addition,
and you've got 128 of these cores. This whole SM can do 256 floating point operations per SM
per clock cycle of the device. Then we'll also see that in red, we've got-- this is where the real magic happens, that in addition
to these FP32 cores, there are also these four tensor cores. I think the name is a little bit of a misnomer.
These are actually matrix cores. What each of these little tensor cores does is they're special circuits that are designed.
They only do one thing. They do matrix multiply. So each one of these little tensor cores can do a single chunk of matrix multiply.
In particular, I believe the H100 ones can do a 16-- input matrix A is 16 by 4, input matrix B is 4 by 8,
and then plus a bias matrix of a size 16 by 8. So it basically does ax plus b, where
a, x, and b are little matrix chunks of this fixed size. And it can do that one little chunk of matrix
multiply once per tensor core per clock cycle. So then if you multiply all these numbers out,
you see that little matrix multiply of ax plus b of that particular size is 1,024 floating point operations,
where that's counting each multiply, each add as a single floating point operation. We multiply that by the 4 tensor cores in the SM.
And we see that the entire SM, if it's going through the tensor cores, can do 4,096 floating point operations per SM per
clock cycle. And this we need to compare with the 256 that we can get from the FP32 cores.
And here we see that just like the tensor cores are where all the magic happens. This is where the main throughput of the device
comes from. And if you're writing code that wants to run on these GPUs and they can make maximum usage of them,
you need to make maximum usage of these tensor cores. Another interesting thing about these tensor cores
is that they actually operate in mixed precision. Rather than traditional floating point numbers, which are normally 32-bit, the tensor cores tend to use a mixed
precision procedure, where the inputs are usually 16-bit. And there's a couple of different interesting 16-bit
formats that they can use that we can't get into today. And they'll do the multiplications in this lower
precision 16-bit and then do the additions, the accumulations in a higher precision 32-bit. So these tensor cores take a low precision, 16-bit input,
and then do some of the intermediate computation and produce the outputs in a higher precision 32-bit.
And this is important because at the PyTorch layer, if you forget to cast your model into 16-bit,
it will run on the floating point cores. Instead it will be 20 times slower than you expect. So this seems like a little bit of minutia,
but it becomes very tangible when you mess up those data types in your PyTorch code.
And then note, so GPUs are really fast, and it's really crazy just how much faster they've
gotten over the past decade or 15 years or so. So when I first started my PhD and was working on deep
learning, the state-of-the-art GPU that we were all using was this K40 GPU, which was released back in 2013.
And this thing could do just a 5 teraflops of FP32 compute for the whole device.
All right, so I should explain the graph. So the x-axis is time ranging from about 2013
up to present day. And then the y-axis is the peak throughput of each of these devices measured in terms of teraflops
per second per device. And you can see the graph goes up a lot. But there's something salient to notice here
is that from the K40 to the P100, something really amazing happened in the V100, which came out towards the end of my PhD and around 2016, 2017,
and that the V100 was the first device that introduced these tensor cores. And since then, more recent devices
have gotten more tensor cores, bigger tensor cores, more of the device area allocated to tensor cores,
and this has resulted in a gigantic increase in the throughput of these devices over the past 10 or 15 years.
And the most recent device is this B200 that was formally announced. It's slowly rolling out now.
This one in theory has about 83.3 teraflops per second
of FP32 compute and 5,000 teraflops per second in theory of mixed precision compute on the tensor cores.
So if you step back, this is like literally we've been living through a 1,000 fold increase in computation over the past 12
years. And that's just that the per device level. So one explanation of why AI has gotten so good in the last 10
years, what has happened? This is the answer. There's now a source of computation that we're taking advantage of, and it's gone up by 1,000x in the last decade.
Anytime anything in the world changes by 1,000x, you should step up and pay attention because that's going
to cause major changes in our technological capabilities. And this 1,000x improvement, I think,
is the major driver of improvement in deep learning over the past decade. So it does not have 5,000 tensor cores.
That's 5,000 teraflops of compute on the tensor cores. Yeah. So we always try to distinguish between the compute
on the tensor cores versus the compute on the FP32 cores. So this is already crazy.
It's already crazy that there's been a 1,000 increase in a device that you can hold in your hands. I've held a K40 in my hands, and I've not had the opportunity
to hold a B100. But they feel like the same physical object. It's like about the same size, about the same weight,
looks the same, but the one from today is 1,000 times faster than the one from 12 years ago. That's insane.
But it gets even crazier because we don't train on one GPU. I said that when the K40 first came out in 2013,
it actually was common to train a lot of models on just one GPU. But today, we're training not just on one GPU.
We're training on thousands, tens of thousands, sometimes hundreds of thousands of GPUs, all working together to train one model.
So stack that on top of this 1,000 fold increase in per device throughput. And something truly insane has happened in the past decade.
So we've looked inside the GPU. Now from here, I want to zoom out and put that GPU in context,
not looking at individual devices, but thinking about the modern GPU clusters that we build that stitch a lot of these things together.
So we've already seen a single H100 GPU. And here we can think of it as another level
of memory hierarchy. We already saw inside the H100, there were three layers of memory hierarchy
as we got closer to the compute elements. And as you got farther away from the compute elements, the bandwidth, the memory bandwidth,
the ability of the device to move bits around between different parts of the system gets slower. And this trend actually continues
once you escape the bounds of a single device and imagine these in the context of a full data center.
So here we saw a single H100 GPU gets about 3 terabytes of memory bandwidth.
That's the GPU memory talking from its own HBM memory to its own compute elements, 3 terabytes per second.
It can move bits around. But these things typically live inside a GPU server. Almost all GPU servers have eight devices in one big box,
and those GPUs can talk to each other. And they typically talk to each other at a rate of about 900 gigabytes per second
from any one GPU in the server to any other GPU in the server. So you can see that's like a 3x less memory communication
bandwidth compared to the GPU talking inside one device.
And here we again turn to Llama3. A lot of major players don't publish
a lot of details on their training clusters, but the Llama3 technical report did actually give a lot of details around their training clusters.
So from here, some of the specifics probably vary a little bit from cluster to cluster. But these are now numbers from the Llama3 cluster that
was used to train their models. So they give in one GPU box.
They stack two of those box into one server rack. And a server rack, if you haven't seen it, they're about 6 feet tall, like about the size of a person,
to just get a mental picture of one of those things. So one server rack has two servers inside of it, a total of 16 GPUs.
Then we connect a lot of server racks together into a GPU pod. The Llama3 cluster has GPU pods that are composed of 192 racks,
which is a total of 3,072 GPUs. And these things have really high bandwidth connectors
between all the different racks. And as a result, any pair of GPUs inside that pod
can talk to each other at a rate of about 50 gigabytes per second. And now, you see, this is another 20x decrease in memory
traffic between what an individual server can talk and then what any GPU across an entire rack can talk to each
other. So 3,072 GPUs seems like a lot of compute, but it's nowhere near enough.
So we're going to stack those GPU pods together into a full GPU cluster. So this is actually the full GPU cluster
that Meta built to train their Llama3 models. This thing combines eight GPU pods together for a total
of 24,576 GPUs. I could not find exact numbers on the memory traffic
between these things, but it's definitely less than 50 gigabytes per second. And by the way, this is not the largest GPU cluster in the world
by a long shot. It's the biggest one that I could quickly find precise numbers on. But there are definitely GPU clusters out there in the world
that are 50,000 GPUs, 100,000 GPUs. They exist, and people train models on them.
And the way that this works is it sort of scales out naturally. So you would just cluster together more pods together
to create a bigger cluster, or you might have another level of hierarchy where you might have a super pod that
connects to other super pods to get you another level up. How long do they train with that GPU cluster?
I don't remember offhand for the Llama3 models, but there's been kind of a rule of thumb for the past decade is that the longest models that people train
are usually on the order of months. And that I think has less to do with technology and more to do with people. When it comes to having progress, making plans, having
people work on things, it's very difficult to have training runs that are very, very long. So the longest training runs, the biggest state-of-the-art
models, I think are typically measured in months. I would not be surprised if the very, very largest models,
the GPT-4.5, the GPT-5, if those are pushing closer to a year at this point.
But it's pretty common to see training runs that are on the order of a couple of months on these really big training clusters.
The question is, why do you organize servers into a rack rather than in a pod? You got to put them somewhere. There's physical constraints on these things.
So server racks have been a standard unit in just data centers for decades at this point.
So when these new devices came onto the scene of GPUs, that gives you a different kind of server.
They're a lot physically bigger. They have a lot more power, but you can't redesign the whole data center from scratch overnight.
So as a result, the server rack has been a standard unit with standard hardware sizes and everything
that the data centers are typically built around. How much physical space does like a cluster or something
[INAUDIBLE]? Oh, that's a great question. So you should think of a single server
rack as being like around 6, 8 feet tall, something like that, like, about this big.
So maybe a server rack would be around the size of this podium and about as tall as me.
Then you've got 192 racks in a pod. So imagine 200 of these podiums. How big would that be?
And then multiply that by 8. But that's actually a little bit of an underestimate, because you typically organize these things in rows
so people can actually walk between them. And there's more hardware that you need to pack into the cluster, not just the compute racks.
So in addition to the compute racks that have the physical GPU servers, there will be other racks that contain networking hardware.
We've got a lot of bits that need to fly around between all these devices. So they'll be dedicated racks that
only hold networking hardware. There will also be dedicated racks that only hold storage hardware, because you need to store that training data somewhere and get that
into your devices. So these things can take up quite a lot of space. Oh yeah. Question is, when you go to these big clusters,
do the smaller units of compute maintain the higher throughput? And yes, they do. And that's part of the secret and the challenge of designing
for these systems, because you ideally want to take advantage of the fast communication when you can get it, but also fall back
gracefully to the slower communication on the larger units as you scale up. Oh, how hot does it get?
Pretty hot. If any of you is a gamer and has a 4090 GPU or 5080 GPU in your desktop at home, a single 4090 GPU,
if you're playing games, will heat up your room, make you want to open the window. It will make the room physically warmer.
So imagine if that's what a single gaming GPU can do to an average-sized room, yeah, there's some serious cooling requirements
for these things once you stack tens of thousands of them in a big data center.
Although another interesting thing is about-- I mean, the cooling gets crazy. So a gaming desktop will typically be air cooled, sometimes water cooled.
And then you can design different cooling systems. And you can go nuts on the hardware here to try to optimize all this stuff.
All right. So I think this stuff is super cool. It's just imagining like these GPUs are not just mythical creatures that are floating around in the cloud.
These are actual physical atoms that someone built and stacked up in a room somewhere. And it's really interesting to imagine what they look like.
And so basically one kind of mindset shift when we moved to these big GPU clusters
is actually thinking not so much about the individual devices, about the individual servers. I basically tried to think of the entire data
center as one big computer. And this big computer in this case has 24,000 GPUs,
1.8 terabytes of HBM memory on the GPUs, 415 million FP32 cores, 13 million tensor cores.
And this whole thing can do 24 exaflops of compute per second. That's 24 times 10 to the 18.
That's a lot of flops. It's a lot of flops, but I guarantee you five years from today it will not feel like a lot of flops, which is the even crazier part.
And our goal here is actually to think of this entire block of 24,000 GPUs as one giant supercomputer.
And then the question is, how can we train one neural network for months at a time on this one giant supercomputer?
And train a really gigantic neural network that's really powerful, that can soak up tons and tons of data. And that's basically the question and the paradigm
that we've moved to in deep learning. And by the way, I keep saying GPU,
I keep saying NVIDIA because they are the most dominant training architecture and hardware today.
But there are some others that have sprung up. The biggest competitor, I think, right now to NVIDIA training
hardware is Google. Google has their own hardware called Tensor Processing Units, TPUs. And these are really good.
They've gone through six generations of these already. These are the stats of the v5p TPU, which you
can rent in Google Cloud today. And it's roughly same order of magnitude, similar specs as the H100 that we just talked about.
There are some interesting design decisions in the TPU that are quite different from the GPUs, which I find fascinating, but we just don't have time
to get into today. And someone was asking, how big are these things? This is an actual picture. Just like GPUs, these TPUs are arranged into pods,
and the v5p TPUs can be arranged in pods of up to 8960 chips.
And this is a picture, actually, of a V2 TPU pod, which has only 256 chips.
So then that gives you a sense of how big these things are, each one of those. Then you see there's four racks here.
Those racks are, like I said, maybe about a little bit taller than me. And there's four of them side by side for 256 TPU chips.
And now imagine this thing is going to get a lot bigger in the more recent pods that have up to almost 9,000 chips.
Yes, so Google's Gemini models are almost certainly trained on TPUs. Of course, they don't tell you, but I
would be astounded, absolutely astounded if they were not. And like I said, the TPUs are actually very good.
I assume that most large-scale Google models are trained on these things, and those are very competitive models. So this is really good training hardware.
The difference with NVIDIA is you can't buy it. The only way you can access TPUs are either by working at Google or by renting them on Google Cloud.
But it is very good hardware, and a lot of people are making use of it, but I think it's still a little bit less popular today than NVIDIA GPUs.
And of course, other companies obviously know that this is a very important thing. So there's a lot of other companies that are trying to build competitive training hardware.
But I think my honest assessment right now is that probably NVIDIA and TPUs are the two big ones.
They're way ahead of everyone else right now, today, in terms of usability, performance, just like market share.
But there are a lot of others that are trying to catch up here. Two notable ones are AMD.
AMD has been the second major GPU manufacturer for many decades. They also have a training accelerator called the MI325X.
On paper, it actually has really good stats that are pretty comparable to an H100, but it just has not had the same impact as the H100 right now.
AWS also has their own training chip that they've developed called Trainium. I don't know too much about this one.
I've never tried to use it myself, but I know that Anthropic uses it for some of their training. I don't know to what extent their training is entirely
Trainium versus GPUs. So we should expect to see more. But today, I think NVIDIA GPUs are probably the most dominant.
And Google TPUs are right there. They're really good as well but probably not quite as widely used as GPUs from NVIDIA.
OK. So that's basically part one. What are GPUs? How do we arrange them into clusters? Just give you a sense of the physicality of these machines
that we're building and training on. Then the second question is, how do we actually write algorithms that can make use of this giant GPU cluster
with tens of thousands of GPUs? It's going to require us to develop new algorithms, new ways of thinking about our compute,
and new ways of parallelizing and splitting up our neural networks. So the basic strategy here is going to be split up your computation.
These things are giant parallel devices. They have a lot of-- we saw they have a lot of GPUs, a lot of CPU
cores, a lot of GPU cores. They can all operate independently, and they can't talk to each other too much.
If you think about what a computer really does, like, at a high level, a computer basically does two things. It does computation, which is taking input bits
and computing new output bits from those, and it does communication, which is taking bits and moving them from one bit of memory in one place
to some bit of memory in some other place. And the whole trick is, how do we make use of all of these multiple scales of memory
hierarchy across the entire cluster to overlap the communication with the computation?
And also to split up the computation and parallelize it so that in the process of training
a giant neural network, we have useful work for all of those tens of thousands of individual GPUs.
All of those millions of individual compute elements, we have useful work for all of them to be doing in parallel, and then get them to communicate their work to each other
in a way that achieves training a giant neural network on this giant cluster. So to that end, one way I like to think about it
is there's basically five degrees of parallelism that people exploit when training neural networks, the large-scale neural networks today.
A lot of this is specific to transformers, because those are the dominant architecture that people are using for large scale training.
So if you think about a transformer, a transformer is basically a stack of L layers.
And each one of those L layers is operating on a three-dimensional tensor of size, where one dimension is the minibatch dimension.
We've got a bunch of sequences all operating in a minibatch, a sequence dimension. We're operating on sequences or sets of tokens,
and a dim dimension. So each of those tokens itself is a vector with some dimension.
So our transformers are operating on these three-dimensional tensors.
And they operate through a stack of layers. So that gives us four axes to parallelize on.
We can parallelize on the layers axis, which is pipeline parallelism. We can parallelize on the batch dimension,
which is data parallelism. We can split on the sequence dimension, which is called context parallelism. And we can split on that dim dimension, which
is called tensor parallelism. So all of these have funny names. But if you think about it in this way, they're basically all different ways
of splitting up your computation across these four axes of compute inside your transformer. And then we're going to step through each one of these
in more detail, because there's a lot of interesting nuances with all of these different mechanisms of distributed training.
So the first one is Data Parallelism, or DP. And the basic idea here is simple.
So remember, when we're training neural networks, we're always operating on minibatches of samples.
We're always taking a minibatch of elements. We're computing a loss for every entry in our minibatch, depending on whatever our training task is.
Then we compute a gradient, where the gradient is actually typically an average of the gradients of the losses for the individual elements in the minibatch.
So in most neural network architectures, the computation of computing the loss and then computing the gradient is
independent for each of the elements in the minibatch. So this is something that seems trivially parallelizable.
So the basic idea is that if you can fit a minibatch of N examples on a single GPU
and you have access to M GPUs, then we're going to train our model with a giant minibatch of M
times N examples, where we split up that giant minibatch into a little tiny, smaller minibatch of N samples
that goes on each GPU. And if you think about mathematically why this makes sense, it's because gradients are linear.
So in practice, if you're computing a single scalar loss L, which is going to be the average
of some individual losses computed on each of our-- so these xi,j are all the entries across your entire macro
batch I guess we'll call it. And then the W are the weight matrices of the entire network. Then typically the loss that you're
computing at the end of the forward pass is an average of the losses on each of the individual minibatch elements.
And then if you take the gradient of the loss with respect to the weights of the network, that's the thing we need to compute in order
to make a weight update. Then that is actually going to split. Because gradients are linear, you
get to choose in what order do we want to do the sum? Do we want to do the gradient? Do we want to do the averaging? So in particular, it becomes convenient to arrange
the gradient in this particular formulation where there's this inner term that we've highlighted in blue, which is basically a normal for backward
pass on N elements. And these can be computed in parallel on different GPUs.
And then there's an outer sum where we need to take an average of the gradients across our M different devices that we're operating on.
So that's what's happening from a mathematical perspective. And we see that this is perfectly mathematically sound.
This is basically exactly the same mathematically as training on a single device. We've just been clever with our algebra
and changed the order of doing our averages and our summations. But this is not an approximation. This is exactly the same computation
as we would have done on a single larger GPU. So what this looks like at the GPU perspective
is that we have M GPUs. Here I'm showing M equals 3 because that's all that
can sensibly fit on the slide. But think that this is much larger than 3 in practice. Then each one of those GPUs actually maintains
its own separate copy of the neural network weights of the optimizer state and of the gradients.
So then what we're going to do, each GPU will load in parallel a different minibatch of data. Here we're showing each GPU loading
a minibatch of three elements. And crucially, the different GPUs need to load different minibatches of data.
I've had bugs in my code and students code, where they actually accidentally load the same minibatch on all the GPUs.
That's not going to help you. That's not going to be good. Don't make that mistake. So it's crucially important that your different GPUs actually
load different minibatches of data. Then each GPU will independently do its own forward pass
on its own minibatch of data to compute its own local loss on its own local minibatch of data.
And these can all operate totally independently. It does not require any communication between GPUs.
Then each network will do its own backward pass to compute the gradient of its own local loss
with respect to all the weights of the model. And again, this can happen totally independently because each model, remember, has its--
each GPU has its own independent copy of the model weights. It can do its own forward backward pass
completely independently. But now after the backward pass is done, this is where things get tricky.
Remember, we said we needed to compute an average of those gradients across all the devices that are participating in our training.
So then we need communication. So this is where we do an all reduce operation.
And every GPU needs to send its gradients to all the other GPUs.
So there's two things happening simultaneously. One, each GPU needs to broadcast its gradients to all the GPUs.
And then two, each GPU needs to collect the gradients from all the GPUs that are participating in the training.
So this is an allreduce operation. And this happens in logarithmic time typically depending
on in the number of GPUs. But at the end of this allreduce operation, then each GPU now has an average of all the gradients
across all the devices. So at this point, the communication has happened. Each GPU now has an identical copy
of the gradients that have been all reduced across all the devices. So now at the beginning of the training iteration,
we assumed that each GPU had its own independent copy of the model weights. Now, at this point, each GPU has its own independent but
identical copy of the gradients across the entire macro batch of data. So now at this point, each GPU can make a weight update
on its own local copy of the weights. And because they started with the same weights and they applied the same gradient,
they're going to have the same weights after the local weight update, assuming the arithmetic was deterministic.
And also, by the way, then this is really important. Steps 4 and 5 can actually happen in parallel.
We said that there's actually two things here that can happen in parallel. One is the backward pass where each GPU computes
its own backward pass to compute gradients, and the other is the communication of the gradients across the GPUs.
And these things in practice will typically happen simultaneously. So that means that each model will start off
doing backward pass over the last layer in the network and then compute its own local gradient. Now the model will move its compute
onto computing backward pass for the second to last layer of the model. And while the compute elements are
busy computing the backward pass on the second to last layer, then the GPUs will simultaneously
be doing an all reduce of the gradients of the last layer. So this means that these things chunk along communication
for layer L plus 1 and backward pass for layer L. And they can just chunk along in parallel so that hopefully
by the time we've gotten to the end of the network and by the time the backward pass is done, the gradients have already been all reduced
across all the devices. And we can make our weight update all at once without waiting. This is really important because like we said,
the communication is relatively slow. So the whole trick in these things is figuring out ways to hide the communication costs
and do them at the same time as the compute. The question is, is four or five going to be the bottleneck? And the answer is yes.
It depends entirely on how fast your device is. How big is your model? How big is your minibatch?
How fast is the interconnect between the devices? When you get to this large-scale distributed training, the answer is always, it depends on your situation.
And you need to benchmark for your situation. Oh, why not take M different gradient steps on each of them? That's actually a really cool idea.
There actually was a popular set of algorithms that people used a while back called asynchronous SGD where
they would basically do that, then basically have a bunch of different model replicas, all take a bunch of independent model steps
and then try to average them every once in a while. And those were popular. Actually Google used to do this before they developed the TPU
pods. And some of their earlier networks in the early 2010s were trained in this way. But one, it tends to just be a lot more unstable.
And two, it's very hard to debug and reproduce. And it just tends to work a little bit worse.
So it does feel like a more scalable approach. But in practice, if you can do everything synchronously,
then your algorithms are easier to debug, easier to understand, easier to reason about. And basically, if you can get away
with synchronous gradient updates, it's probably going to work better. But actually, I would personally not be too surprised if we see a resurgence of async SGD methods
in the next couple of years at some point, because I think they are a lot more friendly to distributed training. There's no one computer that can orchestrate all this stuff.
All these things are independent devices with their own independent stuff. There's no driver that can take a God's eye view
and take those steps. All that computation has to happen somewhere. Oh, great question.
I said, as you're overlapping communication and compute, do you need to write code for this, or does the hardware do this automatically?
You definitely got to write code for this. The hardware is not smart enough to understand what you want to do. The hardware, like we said, it understands these little matrix
multiply chunks. It understands pretty low-level stuff. Anything that you want to do to schedule that communication,
you need to take care of in software. But thankfully for a lot of these common use cases, PyTorch ships with it for you.
So for example, in this case, there's a PyTorch class called DistributedDataParallel that will do this for you and make this happen relatively
transparently on top of otherwise straightforward PyTorch code that you've written. Although actually that is really interesting
to contrast with the individual devices, because if you're programming an individual GPU in CUDA, which
is NVIDIA's language for programming GPUs, then actually the hardware does take care of a lot of this async transfer for you automatically.
But at the cluster level, it typically doesn't. Then you typically need to do it in software. So there actually is a little bit
of interesting asymmetry here between parallelism on the individual device level, where a lot of that does happen automatically in hardware versus at the cluster
level where it needs to be orchestrated in software. Yeah, so typically these are heterogeneous systems where different parts of the system
are written in different programming languages. So there's going to be low-level device kernels that actually are the code that executes inside the GPU.
And those are typically written in CUDA, which is it's a C-like language that is NVIDIA's language for programming their own GPUs.
But then those individual GPU kernels will get wrapped up. And you can call those GPU kernels from Python.
And this is basically how PyTorch works. PyTorch is like a collection of a lot of GPU kernels that can do
lots of interesting stuff on the GPU, and then a lot of C++ and Python code that wraps around those GPU
kernels and makes it more user-friendly to program. So in this picture, each GPU is computing its own gradients
in black by itself. And then the gradients in red get computed via an allreduce across all the GPUs in parallel.
Oh, the backward pass at the lower layer is dependent on the gradients from the previous layer. But crucially, each GPU is only doing backward pass locally
on its own minibatch. So then there's basically two different variants of the gradient at each layer that you need to think about now.
There's the local gradients about the gradient of the local loss of my minibatch with respect to my network weights.
And there's the global gradient, which is the derivative of the total loss of the macrobatch with respect to the network weights.
In order to compute a backward pass, each GPU only needs the local version of its upstream gradient. But then computing the global version of the upstream gradient
requires communication. So this is data parallelism.
And there's actually a bit of problem here, which is, this is a great way to parallelize GPU computation. And this was the first way that people
started parallelizing GPU computation in neural network training. But we quickly hit a bottleneck on the model size.
So here, remember that each GPU is keeping its own independent copy of the model parameters, and this becomes a bottleneck when you
want to have really big models. So in particular, now each weight in your neural network, you basically need to keep track of four numbers--
the weight itself, the gradient of that weight, and the optimizer state.
So if we're using Adam, that's typically a beta, that's a beta 1 and a beta 2 per parameter in the network.
And sometimes you'll also have an exponential moving average of the model parameters as well. So typically, you'll have four to five scalars
that you need to keep track of for every weight in your network. And if you're training with 16-bit precision,
which is pretty common these days, some of these you'll sometimes keep in higher precision. But let's talk about 16-bit as a lower bound.
Then you need two bytes for each number. So that means that we need four numbers, 2 bytes we need 8 bytes per scalar
in the network to keep track of. Which means that 1 billion model parameters
is going to take about 8 gigabytes of GPU memory to store all that stuff. And we said the whole GPU only has 80 gigabytes
of memory for an H100. So that means that the biggest model you could ever hope to train in this scenario is something
like 10 billion parameters. And that's not big enough. We want really big models. We don't want to be constrained by the tyranny of our GPU memory
size in telling us how big of models we're allowed to train. So we need to fix this somehow. And the fix for this is actually relatively easy.
We need to split the model weights across the different GPUs. So in addition to splitting the batch of data across GPUs,
we're also going to split our model weights across the GPUs. And this leads to a variant of data parallelism called
Fully Sharded Data Parallelism, or FSDP. And this is relatively simple.
Conceptually what we're going to do is each model weight in the network, each weight Wi we're going to assign it to a owner GPU.
So each weight will be owned by a unique GPU among the M GPUs that we're training on. And that the GPU that owns each weight
will also be responsible for managing the global gradients for that weight and the optimizer state for that weight.
And typically you would split this up by layer. You're not managing individual scalars. This W you should think of like the weight
matrix for an entire layer of the neural network. So now the picture on the right changes a little bit.
Here we're only showing two GPUs because, spoiler, there's going to be a lot more arrows flying around here in just a moment.
So here we're showing a four layer network that we're distributing across two different GPUs. We've assigned the weights for the first two network
layers W1 and W2. Those are owned by GPU 1. The weights W3 and W4 are owned by GPU 3 or GPU 2.
So that means that at the start of each batch, the network weights are split up across the GPUs in this way.
But it's still data parallelism. It's still the same basic idea that each GPU is going to load its own independent batch of elements,
do a full forward backward pass on that batch to compute its own local gradients, then all reduce the gradients and take a gradient step.
Same basic algorithm, but it gets tricky now because the model weights are split up. So here we need to introduce extra communication.
So when you're doing fully sharded data parallelism, now at the beginning of forward, before you start doing the forward pass of the first layer,
whoever owns that weight for the first layer needs to broadcast that weight matrix to all the other GPUs
that you're training on. So in this case, GPU 1 owns W1, so it broadcasts that to GPU 2.
So GPU 2 now has a copy of W1. Now that all the GPUs have a copy of W1, they can run a forward pass through the first layer
of the network and compute the activations at the first layer of the network. And now after you run the forward pass,
each GPU that does not own that W1 is going to delete its local copy of the W1 weight matrix
to save memory. So then after we run the forward pass for the first layer, we're back in the state where the model weights
are split up across the GPUs. But now all the GPUs also have an activations in GPU memory
that is the result of running the first layer of the network. And now it's time to do the second layer, and we do the exact same thing.
So then the GPU that owns the weight matrix for layer 2 is going to broadcast that to all the GPUs
that we're training on. Now they all have their own local copy of W2, and they can go forward.
And by the way, we also have an opportunity to interleave computation and communication here as well, so that while we are computing
the forward pass for layer i, we can be prefetching the weights for the next layer. So in practice, this will happen in parallel
during the forward pass of an FSDP run. So then we'll be computing layer 2.
At the same time, we are fetching the weights for layer 3. And once we get to layer 3, note that now GPU 1 owns layer 3.
So then GPU 1 will be broadcasting the weights to all the GPUs that we're training on. And this will repeat until we've gotten
to the end of the network. And now at the end of the network, then all models, now we know each model has done a full forward pass,
computed its local loss on its own local batch, and has all the activations for all the layers in memory already
for backward. And now we need to do the same thing in reverse in order to compute the backward pass. So at the beginning of the backward pass
for the last layer, whoever owns that last layer weight will broadcast it to all the devices.
Once the devices have that weight, then they can perform the backward pass. And this whole will do a similar procedure in the backward pass.
Now there is a little bit of optimization we can do on the very last layer in the network, which is, have all the GPUs keep the weights
for the last layer in memory. So this is something that you'll usually do in practice. Because at the end, all the GPUs already
have a copy of the last layer weights from the forward pass. They'll just keep it in memory. And just because they know they're
about to reuse it for the backward pass anyway, so we just won't delete the weights from the very last layer.
But now there's basically three things that need to happen during the backward pass. One is that once the GPUs have computed
the backward pass for their last layer of the network, now that they have a copy of the weights, now at that point,
each GPU has computed its own local gradients for its local loss with respect to that last layer weights.
Then we need to communicate those gradients back. And we said that the GPU that owns the weight matrix
is also going to be responsible for managing the gradients for that weight matrix. So now, rather than all reducing the gradients
as we did in the data parallelism case, instead we're going to--
just the one GPU that owns that one last layer, weights, is going to gather and take a sum across all the local gradients
across all our devices. So in this case, GPU 1 is going to send its last layer local gradient to GPU 2, which will then
have the full gradient dL/dW 4 of the entire macrobatch with respect to the last layer weights.
What happens during the downtime? You got to get all this stuff happening in parallel. So then there's basically three things that
need to happen during backward. During backward, we need to communicate the weights. So whatever GPU owns the layer, owns the weights for that layer
has to broadcast them. Two, we need all the GPUs once they get that weight, you need to compute a backward pass for that layer.
And then three, after each GPU computes its backward pass, then it needs to send the result of the gradients with respect
to the weights of that backward pass back to the GPU that owns it. And then after that, then once the owner of the weights
has that full gradient, then only the owner of the weight matrix can now make a gradient update on that one weight matrix.
But I think at this point, we actually do not need to communicate the updated weight matrix because it
will get recommunicated to all the GPUs on the next forward pass. So that's a little bit different from the DP case, maybe.
And then basically all of these things can actually happen in parallel as well. So we'll repeat this for every layer of the network.
And then basically in the steady state of a very deep network, all three of these things will be happening simultaneously.
So while we are computing the backward pass for layer L, we will be aggregating the gradients
and performing a weight update on layer L plus 1. And we will be prefetching the weights for layer L minus 1.
So I said there's three things that need to happen. We need to get the weight, run the backward pass,
and then aggregate the gradient, and update the weight. And these things can all happen in parallel. So basically in general, we'll be
operating on three consecutive layers and doing all three of these things in parallel over the course of the backward pass.
And then as we chunk backwards over the network,
then by the time we-- then hopefully if you were properly able to overlap all that communication and computation,
then by the time you finish your backward pass, then all the gradients have already been communicated. All the GPUs have already finished
doing their update on all the weights, and we're ready. And also hopefully your Data Loader that's loading data
is also happening asynchronously, usually on the CPU cores of our servers. So then the CPU is ready with a fresh batch of data
to go forward again. So these things are basically parallelization machines. We have a lot of stuff that needs to happen both within a GPU and across GPUs,
and we need to overlap all of that as much as possible. So we can always feed the GPUs and have them running on those tensor cores as densely as possible.
So then we're basically ready to do our next batch after that.
So this is great. This is Fully Sharded Data Parallelism. And this can get you a long way. But there's actually a slightly fancier variant
of data parallelism that people sometimes use called Hybrid Sharded Data Parallelism, or HSDP.
And in this case, we're actually going to imagine conceptually dividing our GPUs into a two-dimensional grid.
So in the previous examples, we said we had N GPUs. And the way that we parallelized our computation was the same.
We had one axis of parallelization in the previous variants of data parallelism. Once we get to Hybrid Sharded Data Parallelism,
we now are going to have two separate axes of parallelism that we will do at the same time. So the first axis is we will do typical FSDP, Fully Sharded Data
Parallelism, along one axis that we just talked about. So we'll have groups of K GPUs.
And each group of K GPUs will be doing Fully Sharded Data Parallelism that we just talked about.
So within each group of K GPUs, the model weights will be split across those K GPUs. And they will be interleaving, sending weights and gradients
back and forth to each other during the forward and backward passes. But we will have now M copies of those K groups
operating in parallel. So in this case, we have two groups of four GPUs. So each group of four GPUs you see
has the weights split across the four GPUs. But we have the entire setup duplicated a second time
on a second group of two GPUs. And then when you do this, now then they
do typical data parallelism across the groups. So within a group, we're going to do forward/backward.
And at the end of the backward, each group will have computed its own local gradients. And then after the backward, then each group
needs to all reduce the gradients across the groups so that we now have the full macro macrobatch gradients
across the two groups. And then each group can make a gradient update independently once they've received the full gradients for the macro
macrobatch. So this are called multi-dimensional parallelism, because now there's basically two different axes, two
different strategies that we're using to parallelize our computation simultaneously. And why this might be useful is because there's
different amounts of communication required for these two different kinds of parallelism. So if we think about fully sharded parallelism,
we actually need to-- what do we need to communicate during fully sharded data parallelism? During FSDP, during the forward pass,
remember we were copying the weights all over. During the forward pass, we end up doing a communication of one full copy of the network
weights. Then during the backward pass, we need to re communicate the network weights, and we also need to communicate the gradients.
So basically when you use fully sharded data parallelism during a single forward backward pass,
you need to communicate three times the network weights across everything participating in an FSDP group. But when you do normal data parallelism, where
each group keeps its own independent copy of the weights, you only need to all reduce the gradients. So that means that across multiple data parallelism
groups, you only need to communicate the network weights once over a forward backward pass. And this plays into this idea of multiple levels of hierarchy
inside of our GPU clusters. So what you might do, for example, is have a GPU server where it has
eight GPUs with higher interconnect inside a single machine. Those might be an FSDP group because it
requires more communication inside an FSDP group. But then you could have multiple servers that are on this other axis.
So you have one server with a full copy of the model weights, then another server with another full copy of the model weights.
And remember, communication across servers is going to be slower than communication inside a server. So then this is our first example of designing algorithms
to take advantage of the network topology that we know our devices are connected into. The question is, would you rather have--
these things are impossible to tune. It's very, very hard to say.
And then basically, but once you have data parallelism, once you have this DP, FSDP, and HSDP,
this is actually a recipe that can take you a long ways. So for example, a model with 100 billion parameters
would take 800 GB of memory to store. And if you split that over 80 GPUs,
it only takes 10 gigabytes of memory per GPU. So you can have a pretty big model once you have FSDP.
But there's another problem that the model activations themselves now start to fill up memory. So if we go back to Llama3-405B, it's a transformer with 126
layers, model dimension of 16,000, sequence length 4,096. So if you imagine how much GPU memory
it takes to just store the hidden states during the forward pass, that's going to be a lot. So that's going to quickly cause your GPU
to run out of memory once your models and sequences get really big. So that leads to another trick is
called activation checkpointing, which means that we're actually not going to store all the activations in memory.
We're going to recompute them during the backward pass. So to see how this works, it's useful to think
of your neural network in a different way, where there's actually two different layers in the neural. Each layer in the neural network does two things.
It does a forward pass that computes activations for the next layer. Then it has a backward pass that computes gradients that take both the upstream gradients
and the activations. So normally, how much compute and memory does this all take?
If we assume that all of these are constant, then typically a forward backward pass will take 1, 2, 3, 4, four steps
during forward. You'll remember those activations during the forward pass. Then 1, 2, 3, 4 steps during backward.
So in a normal forward backward pass, it takes O(N) compute and O(N) memory for an N layer network.
But as we just said, this is going to run out of memory. So instead what we can do is imagine recomputing the activations during the backward pass.
So what that looks like is something like this. So we'll start with the activations. We'll run the first layer and then immediately throw away
the activations for the first-- run the forward pass for the first layer. And then immediately throw away those activations
and so do this four times. So now we've gone through the network once, got the activations at the last layer.
At this point, we can compute our backward for the last layer, but now we're kind out of luck. We don't have the activations from A3
to compute the next backward pass, but we can recompute them. So we recompute them. Now we can do the backward pass.
Now recompute some more. Now do the backward pass. Now recompute. Now do another backward pass. So if you add this all up, this ends up
being N squared compute and constant memory for a network with N layers, because it's sum N, N minus 1, N minus 2,
N minus 3, blah, blah, blah down to one. That's quadratic time. And you can split this up. N squared compute is pretty bad for deep networks.
So instead, let's not recompute everything. Let's instead imagine taking a checkpoint of activations
every C layers. So we'll only recompute within tinier blocks of the network.
Then in that case, if you take C checkpoints where you remember your activations C times over the course of your network,
then it's going to take N squared over C compute and O of C memory. And a pretty common thing to do is to set C equal to root N, in which case
this becomes N root N compute and O of root N memory. So this is a pretty common way that you
can trade-off computation and memory to train even bigger models. OK. So now at this point, once we have
FSDP, activation checkpointing, HSDP, we can do a lot of damage here.
We can start to train some really big models. And the recipe for that is basically as following. So your scaling recipe that will take you
quite a long way from here is first, use data parallelism, just raw data parallelism, roughly up to 128 GPUs
and roughly up to models of around a billion parameters. You can just do normal data parallelism for models of this size.
It tends to work pretty well. And another thing that you almost always want to set the local batch size per GPU
to max out the GPU memory. That's almost always the right thing to do. And then once your model starts to get big,
then the model itself will take up a lot of memory inside your GPU. So that will start to give you problems.
So it depends on how much memory your GPU has, how fast your interconnects are.
But in general, once your model starts to be more than a billion parameters, that's when you want to start thinking about switching from data parallelism
to fully sharded data parallelism. And then at this point, you can scale up quite a bit, but then you'll run into the memory bottleneck
for your activations. And that's when you turn on activation check pointing. Activation check pointing sucks because it makes everything a lot slower, but it does let
you train much bigger models. And this will scale up to several hundred GPUs.
And then there's some point, usually depending on your cluster topology, maybe around 256 GPUs, maybe
around 512 GPUs, once you get to on the order of multiple hundreds of devices, then FSDP becomes too expensive.
And you need to start switching to HSDP. And then this is basically going to let you get up to models that are roughly tens of billions of parameters,
training on maybe a thousand GPUs on pretty long sequence lengths. So that's pretty good.
But if you have maybe more than thousand GPUs, more than 50 billion parameter models, sequence lengths more than 10,000 or so, this is when you
need to turn to these more advanced strategies-- context parallelism, pipeline parallelism, or tensor parallelism.
And then there's a big question. It's like, oh, my God. There's a lot of knobs to tune here. How am I supposed to optimize this? I need to set the global batch size, the local batch
size, the HSDP dimension, the FSDP dimension, how much to recompute. I'm lost here.
What do I do? There's so many knobs, I don't know what do I do? The answer is to optimize a very important metric
called Model Flops Utilization, MFU. Whenever you get lost in the sea of GPU parallelism,
Model Flops Utilization is your guiding light. Follow this, it will tell you what to do to optimize your training stack.
But before we get to Model Flops Utilization, we need to talk about Hardware Flops Utilization. So remember we said in theory, an H100 can
do 989.4 TFLOPs per second of compute on the tensor cores.
But that's theoretical. How much can you actually get? The question is, how much can you actually achieve in practice?
And that's the metric of Hardware Flops Utilization. You're running some compute on the device. How much compute do you actually realize
of that theoretical maximum? And this is not hard to do. You can write a couple lines of PyTorch code and just like benchmark this.
So this is a benchmark that I wrote that I ran on an H100 yesterday. And you can see what it does is basically x-axis.
It just does dense matrix multiply in a loop and then times how long did the matrix multiply happen? How long did the matrix multiply take?
We can compute how many flops a matrix multiply takes. Then on the x-axis, we're plotting the size of our matrix
going from 512 up to 32,000. And then the y-axis is this hardware flops utilization,
which is basically the fraction of the theoretical maximum throughput of the device that we actually realize from these matrix multiplies.
And you can see that on this pretty straightforward PyTorch loop, we're getting about 80% HFU on an H100 once we get
to large matrix multiplies of around 8,000 by 8,000. So that's pretty good. But the problem is that HFU does not
account for all the other stuff that your model needs to do. We're maybe doing activation computation.
We're maybe running some other models on the side. We're maybe doing data loading, data augmentation. There's a lot of other stuff your GPU
is doing other than just forward backward on your raw model. And that's where we move from Hardware Flops Utilization
to Model Flops Utilization. So Model Flops Utilization is basically saying, what fraction of the GPU's theoretical TFLOPs
are being used for forward backward in my model? And this is the thing you always want to optimize for.
So then to make this more concrete, you basically compute, based on your model architecture, the size of the number of the layers, the size of the layers
you compute, how many flops does it take to do a full forward backward pass of your architecture on your minibatch of data?
Then you look up somewhere, the peak theoretical throughput of the device you're running on. And then you divide those two.
And that tells you how long should a full forward backward pass take if you were achieving the theoretical maximum
throughput of the device? That's the theoretical fastest you could ever do a forward backward pass on your model.
Then you actually time a forward backward pass of your model. Your training loop is doing all this other stuff.
It's doing data loading. It's doing augmentation. It's doing communication. It's doing maybe activation checkpointing.
So it's doing recomputation, doing backward. Your training loop is doing a lot of stuff. Just times see how long it actually takes.
And then divide those two numbers. That gives you a number between 0 and 1, which is like, what fraction of that theoretical maximum
are you actually achieving in your training loop? And that's your MFU, your Model Flops Utilization.
And again, we can benchmark this with some relatively simple PyTorch code. Here's an example running forward backward
on just a short multi-layer perceptron with a ReLU nonlinearity and with really big, with really wide MLP layers
and a gigantic batch size on a single H100. This is getting around 50% MFU.
And then in general, whenever you're trying to tune knobs for distributed training,
you always want to try to tune whatever knobs you can to maximize MFU, because that's the one metric that we typically care about when trying to optimize
training throughput. And in general, an MFU these days generally above 30%
is pretty good. If you're way under 30%, you've probably got some gigantic bottleneck somewhere and something is going wrong.
And above 40% is pretty, pretty excellent. And that's basically state of the art. And here's some numbers that we can
pull from a couple of papers. In particular, this is that Llama3-405B paper that we talked about.
In their final training step, they have a couple different variants of their training phases where they train
on between 8,000 and 16,000 GPUs simultaneously. And across that, they're getting MFUs roughly in the high 30s,
low 40s. And that's pretty good. You're never going to get really much higher than that on an H100.
And actually, paradoxically, more recent devices sometimes get worse MFUs. So on the previous generation devices, the H100s,
you could sometimes get MFUs above 50%. And the reason for that is because GPUs are getting faster, faster than they are getting faster
at communicating. So when we move from the A100 to the H100, we got roughly a 3x improvement in the theoretical throughput
of the compute, but we only got a 2x improvement in the theoretical memory bandwidth. So there's this growing gap between making
GPUs are getting faster really fast, but it's harder to scale the communication between the GPUs. And as a result, we tend to sometimes get worse MFAs
actually on more recent generations of devices. And I intentionally I wanted to spend most of the time
on those points, because those are the ones that you guys are probably going to use in practice. I don't think anyone in this room likely has access
to a 10,000 GPU cluster. If you do, come talk to me after class. I would love to be your friend.
So those are the ones that you're likely to encounter in practice, like, up to many hundreds of GPUs.
But there are these other ones that I just like. There are slides here that I think are pretty nice, but it's OK if we don't go through the full details
of these. You can check it offline. So we said context parallelism is basically splitting on the sequence dimension.
So we said transformers are operating on sequences. And basically the idea is you've got a long sequence.
Make different GPUs handle different parts of the sequence. And if you recall, your transformer block,
this is actually easy for large parts of the transformer because the LayerNorm, the FFN, MLP,
and the residual connections, those all operate independently across the sequence anyway. So it's relatively straightforward
to ask to chunk up that computation across the sequence dimension. I mean, it does get a little bit hairy inside the MLP
because there are weights in there. So you have to have some all reduce of the gradients like we did in the data parallelism cases.
The attention is where things get hairy for sequence parallelism. Because if you remember attention, we need to compute these all pairs interaction
between every pair of elements inside the sequence. The QKV projection is easy, because that's trivially parallelizable over the sequence,
but that core attention matrix, that actually gets pretty tricky to parallelize.
The first version of this that people developed was called ring attention, where you basically take that full attention matrix, chunk it up into blocks,
and then have your GPUs work on those blocks independently in parallel in the right order
to make sure everything works out. There's a lot of details in there. You can check out the paper for more details.
The second, which is a little bit conceptually easier, is called Ulysses attention, where you
do parallelism over the heads. So remember in a transformer, you're almost always doing multi-head attention where you're
computing attention over multiple attention matrices all in parallel. So in Ulysses attention, we're going
to parallelize the computation of that core attention operator. Parallelize that overheads, and then everything else,
all other parts of the transformer are parallelized over the sequence dimension. And as an example, this context parallelism
becomes important once you scale up your sequence length to be quite large. So if we go back to this example of Llama3 pretraining,
they actually train the model in two stages. The first stage they go sequence length of 8,000 with no context
parallelism whatsoever. And then they have a second stage of training where they crank the sequence length up to 130,000.
And at that point, they do 16 way context parallelism. So that means that each of those 131,000 long sequences has 16
GPUs operating on one sequence in parallel. And that's like saying the batch size is 1/16, because now,
each batch, each GPU is working on less than one element.
So that's context parallelism. Pipeline parallelism. We're going to split across the layers dimension. Intuitively what you want to do, you have a network
with a bunch of layers. And we're going to just divide the layers across the GPUs. That's actually a very intuitive thing to do.
The problem is that there's sequential dependencies? Because each GPU, it needs the activations
from the previous GPU to continue running the forward pass. And during the backward pass, I need the gradients
from the upstream layers in order to compute the backward pass. So we can draw a diagram like this, where the vertical axis
are GPUs 1 to 4. The horizontal axis is what happens over the course of time. So you can see that GPU 1 runs forward, then passes
the activations to GPU 2, which passes activations to GPU 3, which passes activations to GPU 4.
GPU 4 is lucky. It can do forward backward all at once, then pass gradients back to GPU 3, back to GPU 2, back to GPU 1.
So from this graph, that's obviously really, really bad, because the GPUs are mostly sitting idle.
And in fact, if you have N GPUs, you're only getting useful work out of them 1/N of the time.
So that means that if we had eight-way pipeline parallelism, your maximum possible MFU at that point
is like 12%, which is terrible. So that's really bad. And by the way, there's a cute name.
These are sometimes called the bubble, is like that chunk of where GPUs are waiting for work. And they're like waiting around for the communication.
So the trick in pipeline parallelism is to shrink the bubble. You want to have less bubble. And the way that we do that is running multiple microbatches
simultaneously. So now rather than running one batch of data through all the GPUs forward and backward,
we're going to have multiple batches of data in play simultaneously and shuttle these things across the GPUs in parallel.
So there's a lot of different interesting patterns you can try to design for this. But here's a relatively simple one,
where we have four-way pipeline parallelism. So there's four GPUs that are all working in parallel.
And then we have four batches of data that are all active at the same time. And these batches are color-coded.
So then we see that GPU 1 runs forward on the blue batch, then forward on the yellow batch,
then forward on the green batch, then forward on the red batch, and while GPU 1 is going forward on the yellow batch,
we have passed the activations of the blue batch to GPU 1 or to GPU 2. And GPU 2 can now do forward on the blue batch.
So these things can all cascade down and happen in parallel. And then the same pattern repeats during the backward pass.
We can interleave these different microbatches as we pipeline them through the different GPUs.
And in this case with four-way pipeline parallelism with four microbatches, the max theoretical MFU
is just the fraction of this graph, which is not white. And that increases now to 57% which is pretty good.
So with pipeline parallelism, in theory, if you go to lots and lots of microbatches, then your MFU is going to be good
because you can do a lot of work in parallel. But the more microbatches, you have, they need to store all the activations in memory.
So now you need to do activation checkpointing, and then you think like, oh crap. How do I tune these things? Should I have more pipeline parallelism?
Should I have fewer microbatches? Should I have more aggressive activation checkpointing? And then should I also layer data parallelism on top of that?
I don't know. What are you going to do? Maximize MFU. You're going to try to tune all of those knobs to maximize the MFU of your training pipeline.
Then the last one is tensor parallelism. So this one you're going to split on that model dimension.
So basically what we're going to do is we have a lot of weight matrices in our model. All those weight matrices are like computing XW equals
Y. That's basically what we're doing over and over again inside of our transformer. Now the idea is we'll split each weight matrix across GPUs.
And now this is different from FSDP because we're actually splitting a single weight matrix across GPUs. And now there's no communication.
Now we do a block matrix multiply. So each GPU is now computing a slice of that matrix multiply
on the full input. So in this case, we split our weight matrix into W1, W2, W3, W4.
And then each GPU just computes a slice of that matrix, multiply to compute a slice of the output.
And then a problem is that, now after you do that forward pass, then you need to gather the activations across all the GPUs
to do the next forward pass. There's a slight trick, which is, if you have two of these layers in sequence,
you can actually get away with not gathering in between two layers.
So if you have two layers, you can sit down in a quiet place and work through this. You split the first weight matrix
into column-shaped chunks. Then you split the second weight matrix into row-shaped chunks. And if you do all this, then it all
works out magically because of the magic and mystery of block matrix multiplication. And you see that the final output
you can compute as an inner product like structure of these block matrix multiplies of Y and U.
So then you basically can have two layers of matrix multiply that are split across multiple GPUs.
And then they only need to communicate at the end of every two layers. And this actually works out nicely because remember transformers have a two layer MLP in the FFN.
So this is a really nice trick that plays really nicely into the two layer MLPs that transformers always have.
So it's pretty common in big transformers to use tensor parallelism, this like two layer tensor
parallelism trick on the MLP in a transformer. So that's basically all of our mechanisms for splitting up
computation across GPUs. Which one is the best? The actual answer is all of them. So in practice, we're going to use ND parallelism.
We saw already an example of two-dimensional parallelism with HSRP. In practice, the current state of the art
is like four dimensional parallelism. If we go back to Lama, we see that they are training with on their biggest training run with 16,000 GPUs.
They're using 8 way tensor parallelism, 16 way context parallelism, 16 way pipeline parallelism, and 8 data way
parallelism all at the same time. And if you're careful, different mechanisms of parallelism
have different communication requirements. So if you're careful in how you arrange these different axes
of parallelism along your cluster, you can try to take advantage of that varying speeds of communication across your whole cluster.
That's basically a whirlwind tour of large-scale distributed training. So the takeaway for today is that an individual GPU
is basically a generalizable parallel computing machine. A GPU cluster is a giant massively parallel machine
with tens of thousands, maybe hundreds of thousands of individual GPUs, and we want to program as one big unit.
And then we talked about multiple different mechanisms of parallelizing our computation across big clusters,
as well as one trick activation checkpointing for saving memory, and then the one guiding light metric that you're always
trying to optimize when you design these pipelines, which is model flops utilization. So the next time you're going out and training
on tens of thousands of GPUs, hope you keep this in mind. And let me know so I can borrow your tens of thousands of GPUs.

Last time, on Tuesday this week, we had a lecture on GPUs
and how to train, how to use them, and how to use multiple GPUs for training, larger scaling,
your trainings, and so on. An exciting, a new topic that we've added to this class this year, which
is, I think, timely and very important with the increase of model sizes and applications
that you see the AI models have these days. And before that, we talked about we covered all of the key tasks
in computer vision, from classification, semantic segmentation, object detection, instance
segmentation, and so on. And we're going to revisit some of these topics, some
of the results of the models we talk about today. So those tasks are still quite important.
And then we talked about visualizing and understanding the models and seeing what the models are learning.
One of the things that we've discussed was, for example, using just in the early sessions,
we talked about nearest neighbor and in the pixel space and how we can actually do find the class of images
based on only pixels-based distances, and we discussed how it's actually not efficient.
And one of the things that we talked about was if we use the embedding layers or the feature
space, feature layers, one of those fully connected layers in the feature maps there, from a convolutional neural network
or any other network architecture that we use there, that could actually be a good representation
of images. And we talked about the L2 distance, if we use that as the metric for nearest neighbor
in the feature space, feature of these models, right? So this means that these features
are quite meaningful for the specific task that we had at hand. And this means that specifically, OK,
if we run a neural network, a CNN, a ResNet, or even
the transformer models, and look at the representations,
the learned representations, in different contexts, you may see these as referred to with different names.
Learned large representations, features, embeddings, latent space, and so on.
But these learned representations or features are very good representatives of the images.
And if we have a way to extract those,
we can always get the class labels out of those features as well by a simple linear model, as you can see at the end
here. But the major challenge that exists is training or building these networks
at larger scale is always challenging. And can you tell me why there is a challenge here?
So the thing is that at larger scale, we need a lot of labeled data because this network is trained
starting from an image, and at the end, we have class labels. If we train this network, yes, these features
are going to be very useful for getting those class labels out, right?
But at scale, we need a lot of manual labeling efforts
to sit down and label the images one by one. If the task is segmentation, you have to label the pixels one by one in every image,
and that is going to be very challenging. So the question is is there a way
we can train neural networks without the need for huge manually labeled data sets?
So these manual labels are the challenge, and we want to see if we can bypass them
in a way to train a neural network that gets us very good features.
And with that, the topic of self-supervised learning comes in light.
And that's what we are going to cover today. So having a large data set of, say, images without any labels,
our hypothesis is that we can train a neural network using an objective function, a pretext task that gets us good
features from images. And then when it comes to learning on a specific data set
with a smaller set of data points, which have labels,
we can basically train, we can transfer this trained encoder and use that to extract features for a downstream task
or downstream objective. So here, we want to define a pretext task, a task that
is general enough to be able to learn some good features from the images
and then use that encoder, let's call it encoder,
to solve another problem, what we call downstream task, downstream objective, which
is the application that you care about. Like for example, we have a lot of natural images downloaded
from the internet. We can train something out of it. And then we have a small data set of, for example,
one of these industrial applications or medical applications that we have few labeled images on.
And we can now use that transferred knowledge to extract features and then classify or perform the task
that we are interested in. So we want to delve into this topic
and go a little bit deeper in understanding the different components.
In a nutshell, what self-supervised learning is, as I said, defining this pretext task on the data
set with no labels. Encoder often gets us some learned representations.
And then another module of the same neural network generates or does transfer the learned representations
into the output space, which could be labels or outputs that automatically
are generated from the data. They are not manual annotations. So if we can do this, then we have an objective function,
a loss function, and a neural network to be trained with loss function.
As you can see here, we call the second part sometimes decoder, a classifier, a regressor, depending on how
we define our pretext task. I will give you some examples, but these could be any form of framework.
But when it's encoder and then a decoder, this is more of an autoencoding framework
that I'll talk briefly about. So after we do this training with the pretext task,
now we can use the encoder and the learn representations for a downstream task, which we just
need to add one layer or even a fully connected neural network,
a linear function, or a fully connected neural network that predicts the labels, and these labels are coming now
from the data set. So that's the major, that's the main concept
of self-supervised learning, that the pretext version of it,
a portion of it doesn't require any labeled data to do the training.
But how to define the pretext task itself is not that straightforward.
There are many different ways of defining those. For example, just keep in mind that we
want to define the pretext task in a way
that it's, first, general enough that can get us good features
and doesn't require manual labeling. So the labels should come from the data itself, right?
So one example would be image completion, where we half
of the image or parts of the image. And we define a task to given the parts that are unmasked,
predict the parts that are masked. Or for example, we rotate the image with a specific angle,
and the task is to take the image as input and predict what's the rotation angle that it's gone through.
And the other one could be a jigsaw puzzle, where we have patches of the image that are not ordered,
but the task is to output the correct order of these patches.
And colorization is one of the popular ones that these are the four that we'll be covering very quickly today.
But given the black and white version of the image,
predict the colors for each of the pixels. So solving the pretext task allows the model
to learn good features. That's what we wanted. And we can automatically generate
labels for the pretext tasks. So the two points that I mentioned we need for a task that could be qualified as a good pretext
task for self-supervised learning. Some other quick considerations to always
keep in mind, how to evaluate a self-supervised learning framework.
There are many different pieces and areas that you can actually
look into the pretext task itself because we are generating the labels and so on.
It gives us the power to do some evaluation of how good the model is able to solve that pretext task.
So that's one of the factors. Then representation quality itself
is sometimes very important. Looking at, for example, only representations
without any fine tuning or anything that I'll be talking about or even clustering the representations to see,
do we see a pattern in the representations? And sometimes, there are some good dimensionality reduction
algorithms. I'm referring to t-SNE here, which we didn't very much talk
about, but this is a dimensionality reduction framework that you can reduce the dimensionality of the learned representations and then visualize it in 2D
or 3D and see if there is a pattern that you can find in your representations.
So robustness, generalization, and computational efficiency, these are all quite important.
But the most important thing, the most important aspect
that we are after is the performance
on the downstream task. Because we are doing the entire self-supervised learning
and define the tasks, pretext tasks, and so on to be able to improve results
for a task of interest or something that we care about. Let's see some quick examples of how this could be done.
This is an example of let's rotate the images
and then predict the degree of rotation as the output.
So we can train this in a self-supervised manner without the need for labels of the objects in the image.
And we have a bunch of convolutional layers in this example and then a fully connected neural network
at the end to do this either regression or classification task.
And this means that this is giving us a set of good features, a good feature extractor, which
we can at the end remove these tasks, pretext
task, specific parts, the FC layers, and put one layer,
or in some cases, multiple layers to classify the features into the object label.
So this time, we use the object labels to do the prediction and train this linear function itself.
So we often look for a shallow network because if the features are good enough, then
we don't need to do a lot of training
on getting the class labels out. So this is self-supervised learning in general.
And although we are talking about the computer vision applications.
But this paradigm of self-supervised learning was actually what enabled all of these large language models.
GPT-4 and all of these frameworks are trained with mostly raw data without any manual labeling.
And not just in language models, in speech, and these days, quite a lot in robot
and robotics and reinforcement learning. Because when we don't need any me labeling data,
we can start capturing data, raw data without any manual
labeling and use those for training. And that's why you see so many self-driving cars in the Bay
Area collecting data because that's getting them the data, and they don't have to really annotate the data,
but they can still train models based on. So with that, today's agenda will cover some of these pretext
tasks from image transformations, and then I will talk a little bit
about a set of algorithms that are around contrastive representation learning that
are slightly different from these image transformation based pretext tasks but have shown promise.
So let's start with the first part. And there we will cover the tasks one by one.
So I talked quite a lot about rotation, predicting rotations.
Let's see if we can actually rotate the images with random or arbitrary degrees and predict the rotation
angle with a model. And our hypothesis here is that the model, a model
could recognize the correct rotation of an object only if it has the common sense visual common
sense of what the object should look like unperturbed. So these models mostly are designed around this concept
of visual common sense. And then if the model is able to capture
that it means that it is also able to summarize the image, the entire image, into a useful set of features,
good features. This paper published in 2018 implemented this
with just exploring four different angles of 0, 19, 90, 180, and 270, these rotating images with one
of these angles and then using a convolutional neural network
to basically predict what each of these rotations the output is.
And because they only created four different outputs, this is a classification task because it only
has four different cases. It doesn't have to predict the exact value of the angle, the degrees.
But it's actually just predicting
one of these four classes of 0, 1, 2, or 3.
y0, 1, 2, or 3. So with that, the authors were able to learn
good representations. And with those representations, they
started training the neural network at a downstream application, basically fine tuning the neural network based on fine tuning the encoders
and also the classifier.
Actually, in this case, they froze first and second layers,
and then they fine tuned the last convolution layer and the linear layer.
So it's not entirely fine tuning the entire network,
but they were able to get very good results. This is on CIFAR10 data set, one of the data
sets that we've talked about earlier. You see that when the model is pre-trained,
it starts with a good accuracy to start with. So it means that it already is in a good shape,
and it's having a good understanding of the objects, even in the very first iterations.
But if the task is simple enough, CIFAR10 is actually not too hard to train a model for.
If the task is simple enough, the supervised version, the fully supervised version, and the one that
starts with pre-training, often converge to the same number, same accuracy. But again, if the task is simple enough,
in very hard application, in much harder to applications, often the supervised learning frameworks, if we don't
do any pre-training, large scale pre-training, we don't get as good results. OK.
So they've done also some applications,
some experiments on this PASCAL VOC 2017 data
sets which involves a number of tasks, including classification, detection, and segmentation.
And of these three sets of tasks, they've used different setups of just training
a few fully connected layers or all of the layers for the classification, detection,
and segmentation tasks. If you look at the ImageNet labels,
like if we have a huge labeled data set, and we pre-train on that data set.
We already get a very high accuracy. But again, have this in mind that this is ImageNet with all of the labels involved
for the pre-training. But if we don't do any supervised pre-training,
and the pre-training is all based on self-supervised, it's showing that this rotation framework is
doing a much better job than many of the other counterparts,
any of the other methods that we don't actually
go into many of the detail of many of those, but it's showing efficacy for this rotation pretext task.
And see how it's different, how much better it is if you start with a random initialization of the weights.
So the random initialization versus this pretraining with rotation, pretext task.
The difference is huge, and this rotation pretext task is not
equal, but it's close to pre-training on the entire ImageNet.
So one other thing that they've looked into in this paper was looking at the features
and how the learned features are meaningful.
I mentioned earlier that one of the ways of evaluating
the pretext tasks, generally self-supervised learning frameworks, is to look at the features. And you can always go from the features
from the fully connected layers. We talked about grad cam and all of those other attention-based
frameworks, how we can go from the features back to the image space. So this evaluation involves projecting those
into the image space and seeing what the model is looking at. If you look at the attention maps for the supervised model,
often the supervised model has more focused maps because it's only trying
to solve one single task of classification. So if it captures the eye and the shape around it,
it doesn't care about the other parts very much. But in cases of self-supervised learning,
often, more features, more areas are covered because it has to have a more holistic understanding
of the image because we don't know what the downstream task is, but the goal is to perform equally well in many of those.
So that's one of the tasks. If you do have any questions, keep it.
I'll stop after going over some of the tasks. And if your question was not answered,
then I would be happy to answer that. OK.
Another one, another popular pretext task
was to basically create this 3 by 3 grid and then use networks to predict the location of each
of the given patches with respect to the sensor patch. So for this patch, which is from here,
the output should be 3 because we only have 8--
This is 3 by 3, and the center patch is the reference. So this also turns out to be an eight-way classification task.
It's getting any of these patches, and it's trying to output what the location of that given patch
is with respect to the center patch.
So this was another example.
But this other follow-up paper, paper publication,
which turned this into a jigsaw puzzle framework, was instead of asking the model to just predict
which of these eight patches it is, it tried to predict the exact permutation,
the right permutation. So what they've done was they used the same three by three
grid, took all of the patches, shuffled them randomly, and then ask the neural network to say which one should
be the correct permutation. So they basically predict the correct permutations.
Can you tell me what is the number of permutations you can have for this setup?
Say again? 9 factorial. Yes, exactly. So it's a huge number, right? 300,000 something, I think.
But what they've done was they've created this lookup table with only 64 plausible, possible
permutations. And then only they consider 64 permutations.
And then they're shuffling that, they do the shuffling based on one of these 64.
And then the output will also be just the 60, 64 sized vector.
So again, this turns out to be just a simple classification task with 64 output classes.
And they've shown this is also a great idea for solving to define as a pretext task,
and on the same data set with similar type of tasks that I talked about and how the supervision is done.
They've shown their method was outperforming some of the more previous models, previous frameworks.
And again, remember that this was published in 2016.
So next pretext task is just inpainting
predicting what is missing. So what they have done here was a simple masking strategy,
you mask parts of the image and then you ask the model to inpaint those parts that are masked.
So how it was done, simple masking on the input image.
But because we have all of the images, we actually have the desired output.
So an encoder turns this into a feature space, and then that feature space is also,
there are some fully connected layers in the middle, and then there is a decoder that decodes
the parts that is missing. And the loss function is comparing the output
with what the ground truth was. And this is basically learning to reconstruct the missing
pixels. Again, we've talked about autoencoders a couple of times
before, and this is also some form of an autoencoder that encodes the input image into a representation
that you want to decode the output. But this autoencoder is trained with a masking strategy, masking
objective. So just to show you some examples,
the inpainting evaluations are a little bit interesting and tricky because when you want to inpaint,
there are so many different ways of inpainting this image, right? And we can say there is just one output to do in this case here.
Reconstruction-based frameworks, earlier reconstruction-based frameworks were actually creating a lot of fuzzy and very smooth outputs.
And that's why this paper that I'm referring to here
was actually using an additional adversarial objective function, which I'm not going to go into details because this
is a topic of discussion for the next lecture, generative models. But generally, how these frameworks work,
we have a reconstruction loss. And reconstruction loss is basically calculating the difference between the patch,
between the image x and the image after it's
passed through the encoder.
And then this is element wise multiplication.
And we also have this mask here because we want to only calculate the loss function, the objective function, only on the masked area.
So we do element wise multiplication with the mask as well. And this basically gives us the reconstruction loss
for that part of the mask that we had. So as I said, it's also supplemented
with an adversarial objective adversarial learning loss function, which ensures the images that are generated
are real looking. So with that, they have been able to improve
the parts that are reconstructed to look a little bit better.
But again, details will be discussed in the next lecture.
So this reconstruction framework was actually able to again provide, and this ours
is the same, provide additional benefit when it's run on the same classification, detection,
and segmentation task on same set of data sets.
I will come back to this reconstruction-based frameworks and masking in a bit because it's
one of the most used models or pretext tasks that these days
are used for pre-training. So I'll come back to this. But before that, let me introduce this other pretext
task of image coloring. And this is another very simple framework setup
that we turn a colored image because our data set is mostly
colored images, right? We turn that colored image into its components or channels
that separate the lightness, the illumination from the color
itself. There are several color spaces if you've taken courses like computer graphics
or CS-131, other computer vision class. You know that there are so many different color spaces.
Mostly, in computer vision, we use RGB. But if you want to separate lightness, illumination
from color, there are some other color spaces. For example, LAB color space, LAB,
is one of those color spaces that separates lightness from color.
So we have one channel for lightness and two channels for defining the actual color.
And if we add these two all together L, A, and B,
all three channels together, we can actually get the colored image. So the pretext task here is simple.
Given the L channel, predict the A and B channels, right?
So again, we don't need to do any manual annotation. It's already in the data.
And this was extended into other frameworks. Why should we only look at like given L, predict A and B.
We can also do the reverse, right? And that led us to split, something
that we call a split brain autoencoder, where the input image is split, is basically turned into one.
The L channel, lightness channel, and the color channels. These two images, this is one channel.
This is two channels of color. And we train two functions, two neural networks,
sets of layers to predict the other one. And then at the end, in order to calculate the loss function
and backprop, we just merge these two to generate the actual image and a loss an L2 loss.
Any distance function can help with training this neural network.
In a more generic framework or formulation, the idea is given one channel or a set of channels,
predict the others, and do the same for X2.
So sets of channels X1, sets of channels X2. So given one we can predict the other one, and these
are the neural networks for those. Merging them we'll get the value the image
and then loss function would be simple. So if we have such a framework we can run it on everything, not just color and illumination.
We can have data from some of these RGBD sensors, those
that have RGB channels and depth channels, like for example, connect and other sensors
that they use in robotics. And given the RGB channel, predict the depth and vice
versa. And this was a very successful downstream task that was used for different applications.
And as you can see this model and this paper that I just the split brain and the papers that the model that
predicts colorizes the images is those features themselves.
They do have actually a very good level of accuracy for predicting the class labels.
And you can see, there are many different other frameworks that are used also in terms of comparisons.
Again, this is not as good as supervised learning because there is no label involved here
and it's just based on the learned features with concatenated features out of F1 and F2.
OK, so the image coloring pretext task
was actually very interesting because now we could not only
use it for pre-training neural networks, but it was also itself useful somehow, because now we could colorize images that we
don't have a colored version. So we could colorize images and videos
that we don't have a colored version of those.
And not only that, one of the other interesting results that they've shown in the paper was
this image of Yosemite and the Half Dome that they colorized.
The interesting thing that is seen in this image is the consistency between the actual object,
the Half Dome or trees, or the bridge and its reflection in the water. So the model was also able to understand
that this reflection should also somehow preserve the color based on how it was trained
on vast amounts of data. Again, keep in mind that these models
are all pre-large language, large vision models. And they have been trained on specific tasks.
So they're not trained for solving everything.
So this could be actually extended into video settings. Because now if we have a video, we can have a reference frame
that has the color and do the coloring for the follow-up frames and how this is done.
This is very simple because with-- this is also very useful because with colorizing future frames
in the video, what we are doing is we basically try to track pixels and objects in the video,
and the model implicitly learns how these tracks should be formed.
So the hypothesis is learning to color video frames should allow a model to learn to track regions
or objects without labels.
And learning to color videos because there are a lot of correspondences is an interesting task by itself.
I would suggest taking a look at the details. I'll very briefly to talk about them.
So if you have a reference frame, what we need to do is for coloring the input frame,
we need to find the pointers of where that's a specific object or pixel is.
And then based on that see what the color is and copy what the color is as the color
for that pixel as the output, as the target color. And how this is done is very much similar
to the same topic of attention that we talked about. So it's about forming attention for each
of the pixels for each input frame, sorry reference frame and target frame.
We often run a CNN to see what features around those pixels should be used.
And using those features, now we can calculate, for each of the target pixels, we
can calculate the attention or the distance to all of the frames, all of the pixels in the reference frame.
And then after defining this attention with respect to the pixel of interest in the target
frame with all of the pixels in the reference frame.
Now we can do an average color of all of based
on those attention modules. So attention is basically just similarity between the two.
So anyways with that, what we can do is we can just get the output color
as an average with that tension and then ultimately calculate
the loss function because we have the values of the colors,
the right colors of those pixels in our data. And this was able to, with this reference frame,
colorize the images. You see how consistent this becomes in terms of coloring.
If we color them separately without this consistency over time, you often see, for example, the person's shirt
or clothing changes color because there is no constraint
to keep it consistent. And then there has been also some very interesting
applications, because now that you are calculating attention to a reference frame, you're actually
able to track objects, track segments in videos, and even identify key points in the videos.
That's a good question. You're asking your question is about this slide basically,
and how the encoder knows about the data to begin with
and gets us good learned representations. So all of these tasks that I presented and defined
are trying to do something here at either decoding, classifying,
or using regression to generate some outputs to be able to train this encoder.
So if your original images, if these are all natural images taken off of internet or ImageNet
or whatever, then you are learning an encoder that can extract features from those types of images
with the pretext task. And then when you remove the decoder and add this classifier to the end,
you only need to train this part, because this encoder was already trained with all
of these pre-training tasks that I just talked about. You're asking if the labels are coming
from the decoder for pre-training the encoder, and the answer to that is, yes.
That's why we define the pretext tasks, because we want to have some labels, some outputs.
And then based on those outputs we try to train this entire network.
And on the way of predicting the right labels,
this encoder is also trained. Good question. You're asking if encoder and decoder are one big neural
network or there is differences. In different papers, in different works,
it has been completely different. In some cases, your encoder and not just decoder,
that's why I'm calling it classifier. In the example that I showed you about predicting the degree,
this is just a simple neural network. The decoder is these FC layers. So this could be one entire network.
And then you're replacing it with something for your downstream task. But in some cases, for example, when I talked about auto
encoding an image and then decoding another image, you often have two neural networks
that are trained end-to-end because you want to make use of that representation space in the middle.
And in the next thing that I want to talk about, masked autoencoders, even there is no symmetry between encoders
and decoders. They can be just two different frameworks, two different neural networks, even without any symmetry
to train the task. So this is very much task dependent,
pretext task dependent. But there could be belonging to the same architecture
that we know about, say, CNN or ResNet, or there could be two different architectures, even
without any symmetry. Remember that these are the very first methods
for self-supervised learning. So they're not supposed to be solving everything.
That's just a quick disclaimer, but the idea is, the hypothesis here is, if the model is
able to say this is 90 degree rotated, it means that implicitly, it's understanding
the right rotation, sorry, right orientation and direction.
And then it will be able to if given a right an unrotated image, it's able to recognize
what it is in it. But this is a limited task by itself, I agree with that.
The question that you have is why here they use 64.
That's a good question. But that's also an arbitrary choice, almost arbitrary choice.
As I said, there are many different types of different number of permutations here 9 factorial.
So it's a very big number. It doesn't make sense for us to be predicting all of those. What the authors did here, they decided
to select a few of those perturbations that there is enough variation because many
of those perturbations is just like one patch switched only.
So they selected 64 of those that they have the largest
difference distance between them, and they just selected 64 because they wanted to solve the classification problem instead
of other types of tasks.
OK. So I've been talking about these frameworks that
often do some transformation on the image or the videos
and so on. And this brings us to this newer framework, which is published in 2021.
And then there has been so many follow-ups on this, and it's been a great framework for pre-training for many tasks,
even if these days when we want to pre-train on a data set on raw data sets, we often use this MAE framework.
It's called Masked Auto Encoders. It is also reconstruction based framework
similar to that masking strategy in painting that I mentioned, but this is far more detailed.
And as you can see, this framework is not just selecting one mask.
There are so many different patches and places that they do masking with even more aggressive sampling
rates, 50% masking or 75 masking rates and ratios.
And through training in larger scale, they have shown that not only they
are able to reconstruct all of those masked areas, they are also getting very good encoders that can summarize
the images into good features. And how this was done was through defining
a encoder and a decoder. And that's one of the examples that I said these are not symmetric.
And encoders and decoder, so a large portion of the input masks.
Input patches are masked and the ones that are not masked, they are given to the encoder to encode in two features that
are then passed through decoder to generate the complete image.
But let's go a little bit into details of what this means. I do have some of the details on how
these models are trained here. But I very briefly just explained to you
how these models often work. The encoder here is very much similar to ViTs.
All of them are based on transformers, the ViTs that we've talked about.
Similar to the ViTs, the images are split into patches. The patches are then sampled, so uniform sampling
is what they've done and they've shown 75% sampling was quite efficient in the experiments.
And they use a high masking ratio,
and then this makes the prediction task very challenging and challenging in the set of pretext
for pretext tasks in self-supervised learning means the task is meaningful. The task is very good because the model
has to learn good features to be able to reconstruct it. So with that high sampling, high ratio
of sampling, what it can do is they can actually augment the data by a lot too, because each time you
mask 75% of the data, so you can reuse the same image multiple and multiple times during training.
So you will have so much of data to train this encoder with.
And then that's why they use a huge encoder, a large ViT
in as their encoder. So this encoder itself only sees 25% of the samples.
The patches embeds those two with first linear projection
to some embedding spaces. Then positional embeddings are added exactly same
as what we mentioned for ViTs. And all of these are transformer blocks.
And the encoder is very large, that's what I just mentioned.
And then when it comes to the decoding part, so we have the embeddings of all of those patches
that were present for the patches that were masked or were missing.
For those, there is a trainable parameter, very much similar to that class token that we had.
A shared masked masked token that is basically
in some sort of average. We can consider that as an average patch,
an average representation that is put for the ones that are missing are masked, and then the decoder has to transfer them
to the image patches of the entire image,
and then the entire image is the output target is the output.
So how we train this, this is a simple MSE based mean squared error loss function for between the image
and the reconstructed image, the loss function is only computed for the masked patches
similar to the previous one that I just talked about. And then what it has is--
When we do the training, they've shown in the paper that you can do either linear probing or full fine tuning
to use it for your downstream tasks, for any of the applications that you have in mind.
And in linear probing, what happens is you often have your encoder frozen and then use
the learned representations and only learn a linear function for the final task.
And this mark, it means that it's being trained, but in full fine tuning, in fine tuning,
the pre-trained encoders are also fine tuned, either all of them or just few transformer blocks.
And that's the fine tuning framework. The linear probing provides a measure
of representation quality, how those representations features are, and fine tuning always exploits models
near to potential to adapt for new tasks.
OK, so if you're interested in this topic
and if you're planning to use this paper, I highly advise looking at the paper in its follow-ups.
There are so many discussions around different aspects model choices, hyperparameters, masking ratio
is one thing they've shown with the masking ratio that the 75% is actually giving them a very high accuracy.
So 75% that's the reason that it was chosen. Decoder depth, decoder width, mask tokens, reconstruction
targets, data augmentation how it's helpful and mask sampling method I'm showing the results here again.
Mask sampling method is mostly around should they use some random masking blocks or grid
type of masking. You see the examples here, and they've came to the conclusion
that this random masking was the best choice. And finally they've been able to show
that MAE is doing a much better job compared
to many of the other methods that were used. So some of the other state of the art methods
were actually Dino and Moco V3. If you have time, I will briefly go over them. But this framework was actually outperforming
those that are more at the time, advanced frameworks
of contrastive learning. So I'll stop for a few questions if you have any.
Let me just summarize what we've talked about.
Pretext tasks were actually very important. And as I said their focus is on understanding
the visual common sense. And one of the things that also related
to some of the questions that were asked, we can see is coming up with an individual pretext task is often
challenging because the learned representations may not be general enough because of the type of tasks that you define.
For example, if you're using completion, rotation prediction,
or jigsaw puzzle or colorization, you learned representations are good for solving
those specific tasks, and they may not be very good for general pretext tasks.
So the question is in split brain autoencoder, how does the model know how to predict the other channel given
for example L channel, the illumination channel, lightness channel.
So let me answer your question with a question. When you're training a model to predict classes of objects
in the image, how does the encoder know what features to extract to predict the class of models?
Labeled data, because what you're doing is you're back propagating a loss value that is
calculated around those labels. It's the same story here. We define the network that takes one of the channels
and outputs the other channel. How this was trained was by back propagating
what the output should be. The output was the other channel. We do have the other channel in the data.
So instead of defining the task being a classification of predicting the class of the objects,
here we define the task to be predicting the color of the pixels.
And the color of the pixels, we already have them in the data set, so the loss function still can be calculated and back propagated.
So the question is how these outputs are used as input to the decoder. So this is, again, a VIT transformer style framework
encoder that turns every input to a token as the output that
is representation of that specific input patch. So we've talked about this.
But then we know that this is not the list of all patches,
there are some of the patches that are masked. For those that are masked, we also
train this encoder outputs a shared mask token, a token that is basically an average token, for example.
It's a learnable parameter. We can't necessarily interpret it, but we can say it's probably something
that is similar to a mask like an average token. So that's shared mask token is put in the place of those
that are missing. And then this long vector, long sequence is created.
Decoder, another transformer framework takes this long set of tokens and outputs those
that are projected as the output pixel value.
Perfect, so we only have 15 minutes and a lot of things
to cover. But I think what I wanted to get out of this session,
was for you to understand what pretext tasks are, and how we define them. And one of the most used frameworks
right now is the masked autoencoder, which we actually covered to some extent.
But anyways, I was here that we did look
at these transformations, and then we know that all of these transformations
are actually the same object as the original image, just in a different form.
But then we also have the knowledge that in the data set, we have other objects that look completely different.
So if I define a task that can say
these that belong to the same object, same pixel, try to bring them close in the representation space,
basically attract them to each other in the representation space, and those that are not--
that they do not belong to the same object,
try to maximize the distance between them in the latent space, basically repel the representation
of these two images. Then this is another task that is often
referred to as contrastive learning, contrastive representation learning, and there
are quite a number of very interesting methods to look at.
We have sampled there are so many papers in this space, especially around 2019's to 2020's, and so
on around those years. Sinclair McCaw, CBC, and then ultimately dyno,
which actually borrows concepts from contrastive learning but is not necessarily contrastive learning framework.
And what we do there is in order to define, attract and repel
functions, characteristics or regularize the model based
on those, we define the reference image as x, and then
all of those that are transformations of the same as positive samples and all
of the other objects in the data set, or in the batch as negative samples.
And these positive and negative samples will basically define a way for us
to calculate the loss function. How can we do that?
Assume we have a scoring function. We want to get a scoring function that says the score for the reference image encoded version,
features of the reference image and the features of a positive sample should be larger than the score that is,
comparing the reference image and the negative samples.
So with this type of scoring function, if we--
so basically to define this type of scoring function, we define a loss function based on that.
After training the scoring function S,
you can see this S is the same as the score in the previous slide. So if we have that scoring function,
now in order to attract and repel, we can use this framework of turn
them a softmax setup with exp that turn those scores
into probability values. And then in the denominator, you see all of the other negative samples that are used
are considered. In order to implement actually we use this we use the batch learning framework.
All of the other negative samples that belong to other objects in the batch
are taken as negative samples, and one of the transform is as the positive sample.
So we define the loss function like this. And a score for the positive pair,
score for all of the other negative pairs. And this function is very similar to what we've actually
discussed before. Any ideas? This is the cross entropy for multi classes.
So if we have n samples-- sorry n samples, yes, then in this case, we have n samples.
So the softmax is if you have multiple classes, if you have 10 classes as the output,
it wants to maximize the score for one of those 10, and minimize for the rest of it.
It's the same story here. We want to maximize this score, but minimize
the score between a negative and reference. So it's the same concept that we discussed
about multi-class classification, but put it in the form of formulation
of contrastive for this loss function as contrastive learning. This function is called info NCE or the information Noise
Contrastive Estimation loss, which was proposed in this paper.
And there are a lot of theoretical discussions in the paper that this objective, this loss function
measures the dependencies, sorry that it's a lower bound
on mutual information. And what mutual information is, when you have two images
and you calculate the mutual information between them, it's basically measuring the dependencies
or shared information between these two images. So what we want to do is, we want
to maximize shared information between x and x plus, but minimize the shared information for x and x minuses.
So the paper says and again, this will itself
take half an hour to go into. So you should definitely take a look at the paper if you're interested, that the negative of this loss function
info NCE, is a lower bound on mutual information between x and x plus.
So a lower bound on mutual information if the negative of it is a lower bound on mutual information.
If I minimize the info NCE, I'm basically maximizing the mutual information
between x and x plus. So this is what I really want. So that's why we take this as the loss function
and start minimizing that value.
There is also another theoretical aspect in the info NCE paper that says the larger
the number of negative samples the tighter the bound. So it tightens the bound based on the number
of negative samples. So that's why for training and loss function a neural network
with this type of loss function, we need a huge batch size. With a larger number of negative samples,
we'll get better and much faster training convergence.
And then this loss function was used in a number of different frameworks.
And in the next few minutes, I'm just going to tell you what those frameworks are.
For example, Sinclair is a simple framework for contrastive learning, is basically taking each image,
do the two transformations of the same image, transfer it into the representation space. And what it does is it calculates
the cosine similarity between embeddings representations.
But before doing that, it does a linear or non-linear projection into a set of features z, that calculates the distance
between those in this space. And this is the way that they do this,
generating this positive samples. And for generating positive samples,
all sorts of transformations would make sense. The details are basically covered here.
Generate a positive pair by sampling data augmentation functions.
So we sample a few of those then we calculate the inverse and see loss on the pairs.
And this is what we iterate because each sample has 2n
multiplied by n samples that we have created. So what happens is we take a list of images
in the mini batch, in the batch that we have, and pass them through encoder for both variations
of the same image. So each of the images basically will have a transformed version
of it. And next, so we have sub 2n samples in the batch now.
And then this means that for each of the samples the next one, these two are positive samples,
and everything else is negative. So for the first one, the second image is positive.
Everything else is negative. For the second one the first is positive and everything else is negative.
And this repeats for all of the samples there. So this is a high level definition of SimCLR.
Please note that we have in assignment 3, a question
related to SimCLR that you will be exploring this framework
a little bit more. But be careful that the definition is slightly different from what the standard definition that I
presented here. And make sure you follow the instructions in the assignment.
So SimCLR was actually very successful. It was able to without the use of labels or--
and then a training a linear classifier on top of the features, it was able to surpass
all of the previous works and even basically generate
results comparable to the supervised learning, fully supervised learning frameworks.
Although we need a larger neural network because now we are learning more generic features.
But in terms of accuracy, this was not as it was comparable to what we had for supervised learning.
So the interesting thing with SimCLR
and some of the results around it was that there are a few choices.
Actually, let me spend time on the main choices. You may have this question of why did we project the features
into a new variable instead of using the same representations? So this was a design choice that they made in SimCLR,
because they rightly so assume that when
we have an objective function that does this contrast between samples, you often lose some more information,
some extra information that do not help with the contrastive learning framework. So in order to preserve all of those extra features,
representations are defined as h, but then there is this linear or non-linear projection--
in their paper they use non-linear projection, to get the z values that they can calculate influencer.
So that's one important design choice. And the other one is I mentioned earlier large batch sizes.
You need huge batch sizes, larger batch sizes to be able to get better SimCLR performance.
And we talked about it, how and why this is the case. But we can't always do large batch sizes
for many of the tasks that we have at hand because of constraints in memory and so on.
And that was why a number of follow ups, for example, mocha was proposed momentum contrastive learning.
Instead of using the samples, all of the negative samples
in the batch, what it does is it creates a queue and keeps a history of the negative samples
across batches over time in the model. So it doesn't only depend on the negative samples in the batch,
it has a separate queue that is defined and keeps a number of negative samples and changes it,
updates it over time to train, to do the inference loss,
the contrastive loss here. But because we have this queue, we cannot back propagate
because those samples are not in the batch anymore. So we cannot back propagate for the negative samples,
and that's why it had to separate the encoder for positive samples, which are now called query.
And the negative samples which are now called key in this architecture.
So the training only impacts encoder and over time the Q encoder, using a momentum m, it updates the key encoder,
the momentum encoder. So this is a framework that has actually
been very successful in terms of implementation, and follow up versions of it.
There is a lot of interesting results, but then what they've done was basically
tried hybrid versions of using some non-linear projection heads
and data augmentation from SimCLR and using this mini batch style, the decoupling of the mini batch
and negative samples from MoCo, and they've shown that actually if you do this together, MoCo version 2,
it improves the performance by a lot.
So I will stop here, but there was some notions
of CPC, the Contrastive Predictive Coding, as another example, that you can look at in the slides.
And then a better version of MoCo, MoCo version 3 and DINO
is also one of the widely used frameworks which actually has a similar type of architecture as MoCo,
but it's not necessarily contrastive learning because now we have students and teacher networks.
So I'll leave that for a separate discussion, and if you're interested, we can discuss maybe
in the future slides, in future lectures. But anyways, this is also one of the widely used frameworks
for extracting features from images and also videos sometimes.

Welcome back to CS231N lecture 13. Today we're going to talk about generative models.
Last time we were talking about self-supervised learning, which is this really interesting paradigm where we want to somehow learn structure directly
from data with no supervision, with no labels. And the typical formulation of self-supervised learning
that we talked about a bunch of examples last time is you have your big data set with no labels. Ideally it's just images.
It 's this great. You can get a lot of images. You're going to feed these through some encoder that's going to extract a feature representation from your images,
then go through some decoder that will predict something from that feature representation. And the whole trick in self-supervised learning
is coming up with some pretext task that you can train this whole system on without requiring any human annotation or human labels.
And then so we talked about things like rotation of different tasks that we can use as pretexts to formulate these self-supervised learning
objectives. And then typically, this is usually a two-stage procedure where first, you're going to go and learn
this self-supervised encoder decoder on your self-supervised task on all the data that you can find.
And then after that, you're going to throw away the decoder, and then slot in some new, possibly tiny, fully connected network and actually
train this thing maybe end to end, or maybe just learn the fully connected network at the end on some small labeled task.
And the idea here is that via self-supervised learning, this pretext task, you can train on lots and lots of data,
millions, hundreds of millions, billions of samples where we don't have access to high quality human labels.
And in the process of self-supervised learning, it's going to learn something about the general structure of images or of data.
And then you can transfer that knowledge to downstream tasks where you have small amounts of human labels. So then the typical setup you should keep in your mind
that we want to work towards in self-supervised learning is that you're going to train on a billion unlabeled images
that we're getting from the internet somewhere, and then we're going to transfer those features to tasks where we're willing to sit down and label maybe tens, hundreds,
maybe thousands of examples for particular tasks that we really care about. But we want those tasks to be improved
by this generic knowledge that we've learned through this self-supervised pretext task. And we talked about a couple of different kinds of pretext tasks
last time, including rotation, rearrangement, reconstruction. All of these are basically having
this sense of that you're making some geometric perturbation, geometric disturbance to the input pixels,
and then you're asking the model to somehow recover from that perturbation. So in the case of rotation, maybe you rotate the image
and you ask the model to predict how much it was rotated. In the sense of rearrangement or solving jigsaw puzzles,
you're going to cut the image up into patches and ask the model to try to predict what was the relative arrangement of those patches
in the original image. Or in reconstruction, maybe you're going to delete some parts of the input image, and then ask the model to fill them in as some inpainting
or reconstruction task. And these are fairly successful. We also talked last time about a different formulation
of self-supervised learning called contrastive learning, which has been very successful. And here I was told that you ran out of time a little bit
to cover a couple of these later methods, so I wanted to just go over those really quickly at the beginning of today's lecture instead.
So the idea of contrastive learning is you're going to get pairs that are similar and pairs that are dissimilar, and you
want to pull the similar pairs together and push the dissimilar pairs apart. And the way that you usually do this
in the context of self-supervised learning is you're going to start with your input images. And again, these are unlabeled images.
You don't have labels for them. And now for each input image, you're going to apply two random transformations.
So in the case of the cat, we took one crop around the cat's face, another crop around the backside of the cat.
And around the monkey, we took one around the monkey's face and also dropped it to black and white, et cetera, et cetera.
So basically for each one of your input images, you're going to apply two or possibly more than two,
but two is a nice minimal subset, two random perturbations to your input image.
Now you're going to feed all of those randomly perturbed versions of your input data to some feature extractor, which
could be a VIT, could be a CNN, any neural network that can input an image and output a feature representation.
Then you want to apply this notion of contrastive. So for each of the two augmentations
that came from the cat, we want those two feature vectors to be the same, so we color them green.
So you basically compute this big n squared similarity matrix where if-- Well, I guess it's 2n (2n) squared, so it's 4n squared.
If you have n images you put two perturbations on each, so we have a giant 2n by 2n matrix for all these perturbed
augmented samples that we got. And now basically we want to pull together
the two augmentations that came from the original image. And for every pair of augmentations
that came from different original images, we want to push them apart. So you basically run all of these things through
your feature extractor, compute this giant, 4n squared matrix of all of your scaler similarities between
those feature vectors, and then pull together the ones that are similar, push apart the ones that ought to be different,
and that's the basic idea of contrastive learning. And one paper that really pulled all this together
a couple years ago was called SimCLR that applied this very successfully to self-supervised representation
learning on images, and that's the one I think you walked through last time. But one problem with the SimCLR setup
is that it requires a fairly large batch size to get good convergence because it's
too easy of a problem for the network. If there aren't that many samples, it's too easy to pick out the two cat ones that looked similar.
So to make the problem hard enough for the network to give it good enough learning signal, you tend to need quite a large batch size in order to get this model to converge to good features.
And then once you do that, you need to reopen all the ideas around large scale distributed training that we talked about a couple of lectures ago,
which is totally feasible. It totally works. But you might ask, is there some way you can get away without that.
And that leads to a couple of approaches that I don't want to go into too much detail. I actually don't want to walk through these
and tell you exactly how they work. I just want to make you aware of their existence and give you the general flavor of what
they're trying to achieve. So in this MoCo or momentum contrast approach to self-supervised learning,
the setup is very similar to what we just saw in SimCLR. You're taking data. You're getting augmented pairs. You run them through a feature encoder.
You want to pull together the ones that are similar, push apart the ones that are dissimilar. But the thing that differs is that we
want to get away with not having to have a gigantic batch size at every iteration. So to do that, they keep a q of samples
from previous iterations of training. And then at every training iteration, I've got my x query is my current new batch of data.
And I have this q, x0, x1, x2 key, which are previous batches of data
that I've seen on previous iterations of training. Now, my current batch of data, I'm going to run through my encoder network
the same as I always did, and compute the contrastive loss the same way that we did with SimCLR.
And then this larger q, these previous history of batches, we're going to run through something
different, the momentum encoder, and then still get feature representations and compute the same similarity that we did through the SimCLR
thing. But the problem is that we don't want to backpropagate into the momentum encoder because it has too much data.
It has too big of a batch. We can't afford to fit that in GPU memory. So we want to not have to backpropagate through that part.
So that means that we cannot update this momentum encoder, the second encoder, via gradient descent.
Instead we're going to do something wacky. What we're going to do is have this momentum encoder have its own set of weights.
We're going to learn them not via gradient descent. Instead what we're going to do is have the momentum encoder be a exponential moving average of the weights
of the normal encoder. So the normal encoder we're going to learn via gradient descent. Everything is normal. We'll forward prop or back prop.
We'll get gradients. We'll make a gradient update step on the typical encoder, that's the normal thing.
But then after we do that, the momentum encoder,
we're going to decay the current momentum encoder weights by like 0.99, and then add in 1% of the encoder weights.
So then the momentum encoder we have this other update rule where it's this lagging, trailing, exponential moving
average of the encoder weights. And I don't have a great intuition or explanation for why
this exactly makes sense. But there's very strong empirical evidence that this works. So that's the state of things.
But it's nice because it means that you can now get away with learning these self-supervised representations without having to have this gigantic massive batch
of negatives at every iteration. And this was fairly successful. There were a bunch of follow up papers
that pushed this direction. Another one that you should be aware of is called DINO. Again, the idea is very similar.
It uses this similar momentum encoder-- this dual normal encoder that's learned via gradient descent and a momentum
encoder just as in MoCo. But the loss is a little bit different. Instead of using a softmax, they use some KL divergence loss.
And the reason I'm mentioning this one is because you should be aware of the existence of DINO V2 even if we don't talk about exactly what it does,
because DINO V2 is a really strong model for self-supervised features that's used quite
a lot in practice these days. So what they basically did is took this recipe from DINO V1, which was similar to MoCo, had
a lot of ideas from SimCLR as well, but a lot of unique details in their approach as well. But the big difference in DINO V2
is that they scaled up the training data quite a lot. So a lot of these previous self-supervised approaches had been trained on the ImageNet dataset, which
was 1 million images, and DINO V2 was able to successfully scale up this approach to a much larger training set of about 142
million images. So in deep learning, we like bigger networks, we like bigger data, we like more GPUs, we like more flops,
we like all of those things. And Dino V2 was able to find a recipe for self-supervised learning that successfully scaled up
to this much larger dataset, gives very strong self-supervised features. And this tends to be used quite a lot in practice today
if you want to pick up features and then fine tune them or supervise them for some of your own downstream tasks.
So again, I don't expect you-- I don't want to walk through all the details of how this works. I don't expect you to know. But I want you to know that it exists in case
you want to pick it up and use it for some of your own projects in the future.
So that's basically all I had to say about self-supervised learning. Any questions about that before we
move on to the meat of today's lecture?
OK. Guess not. So today the main topic is generative models.
This is really cool. This is an area of deep learning that basically went from not working at all, 10 years ago, to really,
really working in the last couple of years. And this has given rise to things like language models.
These can be viewed as generative models as we'll see, all image generation models, of video generation models.
These really went from just absolutely not working at all when I was in grad school. You would look at these samples and peer into them,
and they just look like low resolution, complete blurry garbage. But somehow you could view some promise in them.
And I'm glad that people kept pushing on that and pushed through the blurry garbage and scaled it up over the past decade because now a lot of these techniques really do work,
and that's very exciting. So this is an area of deep learning that basically didn't work at all with the first time
we taught this class, and that's really cool that it now does. But that said, a lot of the fundamental ideas
around generative modeling actually have remained the same. The ideas about how you think about data, what are approaches
for modeling them, a lot of those mathematical fundamentals actually have not changed that much in the past decade.
But what changed is more compute, more stable training recipes, bigger datasets,
distributed training. And the ability to scale all this up into more useful tasks, I think, was really what drove the progress
over the past decade. There were some algorithmic tweaks, especially we'll see that next lecture when we talk about diffusion models.
But first, before we talk about generative modeling, I wanted to step back a little bit and talk about supervised versus unsupervised learning.
There's a couple of different tasks that we try to approach in deep learning, and they can sometimes be sliced along a couple
of different orthogonal axes. So I wanted to talk about those a little bit just so we get our terminology and our nomenclature clear.
So supervised learning is what we've mostly been doing all semester except for last lecture.
In supervised learning, we have a dataset of pairs, x and y. And the goal is to learn some function that maps from the input data x to the target or label y.
And we've seen a lot of examples of this approach so far. Something like image classification, our input x
is an image. The output y is going to be a label or image captioning. The input x is going to be an image.
The output y is going to be some piece of text describing what we see in that image. Object detection. Input is an image.
Output is a set of boxes and category labels describing the objects that appear in the image. Or segmentation.
Maybe you assign a label to every pixel in the input image. And these are supervised learning problems
because the task you're trying to solve, the thing you want to predict is exactly what you have in your data set.
And all you need to do, in some sense, is learn a function that mimics that x to y mapping on your training data
set, and then generalizes that mapping to new samples beyond your training dataset.
Now, unsupervised learning is something a bit more fishy and mysterious and hard to describe.
But the idea of unsupervised learning, or sometimes self-supervised learning, is that you don't have any labels, you just have data.
You just have samples x. You just have images. And you want to learn some structure from that data.
There's no particular task you're necessarily targeting. You're just trying to uncover good representations, good structure in all of that data.
Why? So that you can-- as we talked about in self-supervised learning often so you can apply it to downstream tasks later on.
But the task itself in unsupervised learning is often somewhat unspecified.
Some examples of this are K-means clustering, where maybe we're trying to identify clusters in the data, which is some structure that we can examine
from the raw pixels even though we didn't have labels for. Or dimensionality reduction, PCA,
where we're trying to uncover some lower dimensional subspace or lower dimensional manifold that explains the structure of our data.
And again, this is something we're trying to discover from the data itself. We don't have annotations of what this ought to be.
Or density estimation. Maybe we're trying to fit a probability distribution to the data. We're trying to understand what is the probabilistic function
that gave rise to the data samples that we're seeing. And again, we don't have explicit labels for this or explicit training set for this.
So this is some hidden or latent structure that we're trying to uncover through the process of training. So this unsupervised dichotomy is something that you always
should keep in mind. And you can do unsupervised learning, which is not probabilistic or not generative necessarily.
Something like clustering, something like PCA, often they have probabilistic interpretations. But these are examples of unsupervised learning
that don't necessarily have a generative or probabilistic interpretation or don't have to be thought of as such.
So I often like to think about the unsupervised dichotomy as one spectrum along which methods or systems can lie.
A separate spectrum along which we can classify systems or tasks is that of generative versus discriminative models.
And these are inherently probabilistic. And when we talk about generative or discriminative models, we're always imagining some probabilistic structure
in our data that we're trying to uncover or learn from. And the difference is exactly what is the probabilistic relationship
between the variables that we're trying to model. So in discriminative models-- so typically we have some y and some x.
And usually we think of the x as something large, high-dimensional, usually an image in our case. And the y is some label or description
or auxiliary information. And so that would be like your text, like your caption, like a category label, something like that.
And when you talk about a discriminative model, we're trying to learn a probability distribution of y given x.
So we're trying to learn a distribution over labels conditioned on our input image x.
And to really appreciate what's going on probabilistically, you need to remember one very important feature of probability
distributions, and that's that they are normalized. When you talk about a probability distribution or more generally, a density function p of x,
p of x is basically a function that assigns a nonzero
number to every possible input x with the very important normalization constraint, that if you integrate over
the entire space of all possible x's, it integrates to 1. And this normalization constraint
really gives rise to the power of probabilistic models in some sense because the normalization constraint
means that all of your x's need to compete for probability mass. There's a fixed unit amount of probability mass,
and choosing a probability distribution or density function basically amounts to apportioning out that fixed amount of probability mass
and smearing it across all possible values of x that could exist. And all of those x's are in competition
because there's only a fixed unit amount of mass to go around. So if you want to push up the probability of one x,
necessarily, the probabilities or densities of other x's have to go down. And so then in these different formulations
of probabilistic models, basically what's changing is what are the variables that are competing for probability mass.
And that means that even though the symbols that we write on the page look very similar, the different competitions
among what is competing for probability mass induces very different structure that the model is trying to learn or uncover.
So in the case of a discriminative model, we're learning a probabilistic model of y conditioned on x, which means that for every x,
our model is predicting a probability distribution over all possible labels. So if our labels are discrete and categorical, like cat
or dog, then that means we have a fixed amount of probability 0 to 1, and cat and dog must sum to 1.
And we have a separate probability distribution over the labels for every input x.
And crucially, notice here that there is no competition among images for probability mass.
Because every image is inducing its own distribution over the label space, there's no competition for mass across the different images.
The only things that are competing for mass are the different labels for each image. And that's very important when you think
about discriminative modeling. And one interesting other thing-- and one interesting other facet of discriminative modeling
is that they have no real way to reject unreasonable inputs. So once we've fixed our label space of, say,
cat and dog, in this example, if we feed in something that's not a cat or a dog at all, like a monkey or a piece
of abstract art, the system has no flexibility. It has no freedom to say this is unreasonable.
It's forced to output a distribution over the fixed vocabulary that we assigned at the beginning. So that maybe could be seen as a shortcoming,
but it's just important to understand what exactly is happening under the hood when you think about modeling different data
probabilistically. Now, a generative model is something very different. Now, instead what we're doing in a generative model
is learning a distribution p of x. We want to learn a distribution over all possible images x.
And now this is very interesting. This means that all possible images that could ever exist in the universe are all now
competing with each other for probability mass. And this is now really a hard question
that requires-- it sounds simple on its face, but this requires you to confront
some very deep and philosophical problems about the world because now all images are competing for probability mass.
And in order to model that, you're forced to answer questions like, should
an image of a three-legged dog-- how should that get probability mass in relationship to an image of a three-armed monkey.
Probably the three-legged dog should get more probability mass because you can have that happen by a dog losing a leg. But how are you going to get a three-armed monkey?
I don't know, that seems much more rare unless you're modeling sci-fi images or something like this. So once you're in this regime of all possible images competing
for probability mass, now your model really needs to think very carefully about the structure that it can exist in the data, and it
becomes a much, much harder problem to solve. And another interesting thing here
is that now with a generative model, the model now does have the capacity to basically say, no, this is not a reasonable image.
This is not a reasonable input. And the way that it can do that is by assigning low or even zero probability mass to any one
image that it gets. So maybe in our generative model, maybe we only want it to be a generative model of zoo animals.
And if we want to have a generative model of zoo animals, then if we feed in an image of abstract art,
it should have zero probability mass. So now we have a mechanism for rejecting or saying that this type of image is not within the scope of what
we care about. And now a conditional generative model is even more interesting.
So this is where we're learning a conditional distribution over images x conditioned on some label signal y.
And now this means that for every possible label, we're now inducing a competition among all possible images.
So in this case, if y is say, a categorical label of cat and dog, now, for each possible categorical label, cat
and dog, the model is separately inducing a competition among all possible images. So now in the top distribution, maybe this
is the probability of all these images conditioned on the cat label, so then obviously the cat image should be high.
Maybe the monkey and the dog image should be somewhat higher because they're still mammals at least. But the abstract art should be very low, maybe even 0.
And then a different distribution among images if we're conditioning on the dog label. And this gets even more interesting
if you imagine that your conditioning signal y is something much richer than a single categorical label, that that conditioning signal y might
have been a text description. It might have been a whole paragraph of written text. It might have been another image plus a piece of text.
So now once you talk about modeling these very rich output spaces x, conditioned on very rich input spaces y, now
you're actually asking the model to solve a very complicated and quite ill-defined problem that requires very deep reasoning
about the objects involved. So that's why I think that generative modeling is such an interesting topic because it looks simple.
All we did was flop the x and the y. How hard could it be? But all of a sudden it required us to think really hard about what's
going on in the visual world. And what's also interesting is that we wrote down discriminative generative models and conditional generative
models as three separate categories of things. But actually they're all related.
And they're related through Bayes' rule, which is one of the most amazing relationships in probability.
And in particular, it says that if we have access to a discriminative model p y of x,
and an unconditional generative model p of x, as well as some prior distribution over our labels y,
we can compose those to build a conditional generative model p of y given x. Or in general, you can always rearrange Bayes' rule
in some way so that if you have any two of these you can always get a third one, which is pretty cool.
So in theory, you can, in principle, build a conditional generative model out of the other two components.
Although, in practice, this is not really how you do it. You tend to learn conditional generative models
from scratch on their own. Although, as we'll talk about in diffusion, you do end up sometimes learning conditional and unconditional
models jointly for some reasons. But this is nice to keep in mind, that there's a very deep relationship across these different flavors of probabilistic models.
So then you might be wondering, OK, what can we do with these different flavors of probabilistic models. With discriminative models, this one
shouldn't require a lot of creativity. We've seen a lot of these examples so far this quarter. So with discriminative models, after you train them,
you can assign labels to data. You could also do feature learning. In the case of say, supervised learning on ImageNet,
we've seen that in the process of trying to predict categorical labels of images, those models tend to learn useful feature representations
in the middle that can be transferred to downstream things. So this is an-- so you tend to use discriminative models for just
directly predicting the y's that you care about, or for learning feature representations that are induced in the process of trying to predict those y's.
These unconditional generative models I think are actually useless in general.
But what they let you do is maybe detect outliers. They look at images and say, are they really-- do they really
have low probability mass? Are they unreasonable images? You can use them for feature learning without data,
without labels. So hope that in the process of trying to fit an unconditional distribution p of x,
the model maybe learn some useful feature representations. Although in general these have not been super successful for self-supervised learning, and typically,
the contrastive methods that we've talked about in the previous lecture have, in practice, been much more successful for self-supervised learning as compared
to unconditional density estimation. Or in principle, you could use this unconditional generative
model to sample and produce new samples x. But I think this is actually useless because it gives you no control over what is being sampled.
If you have an unconditional generative model of images, then you can sample from it to get a new image, but you have no control over what's in that image.
So I think it's mathematically interesting to think about how to build such models, but I don't
think they have as much practical significance. And conditional generative models are, I think,
are the most useful and the most interesting. And these are the generative models that get trained and used in practice by far the most.
So you can, in principle, use them to assign labels while rejecting outliers. You could say, if I have a piece of data x,
then look at the p of x given y over all of my possible y's, and then I could reject if that's too low among all
the possible whys. So in principle, you could use conditional generative models to do some classification while also maintaining the ability
to reject outliers. Although I don't think that's really used too much in practice. What's really useful for conditional generative models
and what is used in practice all the time, everywhere, is sampling to generate new data from labels where you actually get
to control what is generated. Because if your y is now maybe a piece of text, you can write down, I want to see
a cat wearing a hot dog flavored t-shirt on the moon or whatever, and then your favorite generative model of images
will now generate you a brand new image x conditioned on that label y. So this is where I think all the juices, where all the magic is,
where all the excitement is. Although somewhat confusingly, in the literature, whenever you see the term generative model,
they mush up between unconditional and conditional generative modeling. And a lot of the papers that you read
will even sometimes drop the conditioning signal y because it makes the math look cleaner-- it makes the equations look cleaner.
But I don't think unconditional generative modeling is super useful. It's almost always conditional generative modeling
that you really want to do in most cases. So just be aware that if you read papers, see equations,
hear people talk, when they talk about generative modeling, they're probably the one they care about training more are
these conditional generative models even if the math doesn't-- even if the equations or notation doesn't reflect that.
So for unconditional generative model, what are the inputs and outputs?
So I didn't really tell you that. And I was sneaky there because how you parameterize that actually depends a lot.
There's a lot of different formulations for all of these things. And what exactly are they going to be the inputs and the outputs of the network are going to vary quite a lot depending
on the formulation. So we're going to talk about a whole taxonomy of those in a couple slides.
So why generative models? The main reason you want to build generative models is whenever there's some ambiguity in the task you're
trying to model. So the beauty of a probabilistic model p of x given y
is that it's probabilistic. There might be a whole space of possible outputs x conditioned
on that input label y. So whenever there's not-- sometimes there's just a deterministic mapping.
I look at an image, I want to ask how many cats are in the image. There's just three cats. There's just one answer. But in a lot of cases, it's more subtle.
If I ask for a picture of a dog wearing a hot dog hat, there's a lot of different images that could exist based on that query.
There's uncertainty in the output. And that's exactly what generative models are trying to model. They model a whole distribution of outputs conditioned
on their input signal. So anytime that there's ambiguity in the output that you want the model to produce conditioned
on the input, that's where you want to turn to a generative model. And this is why-- And this is-- we'll see a couple examples of where
this has gotten used a lot in the last couple of years. So one example is language modeling. Someone asked about ChatGPT a moment ago.
So in language modeling, what you're often trying to do is predict output text x from input text y.
Sorry, the x's and y's ended up flipped in an awkward way on this example.
So here's an example from ChatGPT. The input is write me a short rhyming poem about generative models.
And wow, it actually works. This is crazy. This didn't work at all when we first taught this class. I'm not going to read it.
That would be embarrassing. You can read it yourself. Now, this is a conditional generative model. You could imagine there's a lot of different possible rhyming
poems about generative models that one might write, and we had to pick one of them. And the beauty of a generative model
is that it, in principle, models that whole distribution over possible outputs conditioned on that input.
Or text to image. Make me an image showing a person teaching a class on generative models in front of a whiteboard.
You're looking at one example through your eyes. ChatGPT gave you a different example. There's a whole different space of possible images
that might match this input text. And a generative model allows you to model that whole space and sample from that space
depending on what you want. Or image to video. Input an image, what happens next?
This was me holding my AirPods over a cardboard box. Maybe I'm going to drop it. Maybe I'm going to move my hand.
Maybe I'm going to move my hand and the AirPods will morph into a different AirPods. There's all things that could happen.
A generative model, in principle, lets you model and sample from these possible futures.
So this is why we want to care about generative modeling. Anytime there's ambiguity in the output, that's when you want to try to turn to a generative model to solve it.
And someone asked about what are the inputs and outputs. It turns out this is a huge field. And this is surprisingly one field of deep learning
that is quite mathematical because it requires thinking about what are different ways to model probability distributions?
How can we write down loss functions that cause the right things to happen? So this is one area where when you
read papers there may be a lot of math, there may be a lot of equations. And you actually might need to think through those equations
pretty carefully to understand what's going on. So this is one subfield that tends to have more math and more equations, which I think is fun--
interesting. So there's this whole taxonomy of different kinds of generative models that people build. So on the one hand, you can imagine
one part of the family tree or what we call explicit density methods. These are ones where the model actually does--
the whole thing is we're trying to model p of x or p of x given y. And with these explicit density methods,
you can actually compute, you can get that value out, p of x, for any sample x. And the counterpoint are implicit density methods.
These are ones where you can't actually get that probability mass value-- you can't actually get that density value p of x out from the model,
but you can somehow sample from that probability distribution. So the difference here is that in an implicit model,
you can't actually access the value of the density function, but you can sample from the underlying density function
somehow. So the model has implicitly learned to model the density even if you can't get the value out. And on the explicit density side,
it's almost the opposite where in many cases-- you can get that explicit density value out,
but then sampling tends to be more complicated sometimes with these explicit density methods. Not always, but sometimes.
And the reason why you might turn to implicit models is because, in many cases, you may not actually care about knowing what exactly was the density
value for any input. Maybe all you care about is generating samples and get generating a good diversity of samples.
So if the thing you really care about is sampling, then maybe you don't actually need to explicitly be able to see the value
of the density for any input. And then things break down and cascade
and get more fractal like from here. So inside explicit density methods, there's ones where actually yeah,
you can really compute the real p of x that's being modeled. And autoregressive models are one example of that.
Or another version of explicit density methods are ones where you can get a density value out,
but it's not the real one. It's some approximation to the true density of the data. And variational autoencoders are one example
of an explicit but approximate generative method that we'll see. Now, on the other branch of the family tree,
we can think about direct methods for implicit density. These are ones where maybe it requires a single network evaluation to just draw a sample from the underlying distribution
that's being modeled. And a generative adversarial network is an example of a generative model in this part of the family
tree. And the other part is-- I don't know if it has a good name, I called it indirect. But this is a name I made up yesterday,
so please feel free to correct me if there's a better term for this. But these indirect ones are ones where
you can sample from the underlying density p of x that's being modeled, but it requires
some iterative procedure. There's no feed forward function that you can input and get the sample directly out.
There's some iterative method that you need to run in order to draw a sample from the underlying density that's being modeled.
And diffusion models are an example of this that we'll see next time. I told you a couple slides ago that people are sloppy with notation and drop the y,
and I did that explicitly on purpose on this slide so that someone would ask me that question, and you would always be attentive to that fact.
So yes, exactly. Every time I've written p of x on this slide and actually all the rest of the slides this lecture--
I also have been lazy and drop the y, but you should always imagine an additional conditioned on y in all of these p of x that you see for the rest of the lecture.
So thank you for asking that. So the question was, can you just treat
that indirect iterative procedure as a black box and then treat that as a direct sampling method?
In principle, yes. But in practice no, because your samples end up approximate depending on exactly the method.
But with diffusion models, you would need to take an infinite number of steps in order to draw a true sample, so instead we approximate that
with a finite number of steps. And that's true of other methods as well. Diffusion models are the most common for this today.
But some Markov chain method or MCMC method in years past might have also had this property where there
is an iterative procedure. But if you want to draw an exact sample from the distribution that's being modeled, you need an infinite number of steps
to converge. So we always approximate that by taking a finite number of steps.
And I was pretty proud of this taxonomy because it's very symmetric.
There's four leaves. There's two branches. And we're going to cover half the tree today and half the tree
next time. So I thought that was a pretty nice pretty nice breakdown. The question is, what's the difference between the approximate density and directly sampling
from an implicit p of x. The difference is that in an indirect but implicit method,
there's no density value anywhere to be found. You can't compute one at all, but you can still iteratively sample in some way.
With an approximate density method, you can still get a value out-- you can actually get a density value out, that's going to be some approximate or bound
to the true p of x. So then the first such generative model
that we'll actually talk about in a little bit more concrete specificity are autoregressive models.
So autoregressive models-- we're actually going to take a slight detour and talk about a really general idea behind all
of generative modeling, and that's the idea of maximum likelihood estimation. And maximum likelihood estimation
is actually a quite general procedure that we can use to fit probabilistic models given a finite set of samples.
So the idea is we're going to write down some explicit function for the density. We said that some methods are going to explicitly model
the density. Well, let's do it with a neural network. Let's write a neural network that's going to input the data x, input the weights,
W, of the neural network, and it's going to spit out a number that's going to tell us what is the density.
So then, we're going to train the data-- given a data set of samples x1, x2, xN, we're going to train the model via this objective function.
We want to find the weights that make the dataset most likely. Where we want to [? accept ?] because as we vary the weights,
it's going to vary the densities that are being modeled by the network. So we want the network to select the density that maximizes
the likelihood of the data. Note that we said likelihood rather than probability, that's a deep philosophical rabbit hole you can fall into.
The difference is what we're varying. If you think about probability, you imagine that the density is fixed
and we're sliding x around, and changing what is the probability of x under a fixed distribution. When you talk about likelihood, instead, you're
often fixing the samples x and you're varying the distribution itself and saying,
how does the probability density of those samples change as we vary different distributions.
So you have to think about very carefully in these equations what's being fixed and what's varying. So in this process of maximum likelihood estimation, what
we're doing is varying the distribution that the neural network is modeling to try to maximize
the probability of the fixed set of samples we have from that distribution in our training set. And I guess the unsaid thing behind all of this
is that we assume that there is some underlying true probability distribution p data, which was used by the universe
to generate the data that we are seeing. And in some sense, always what we want to do is try to model that true underlying unknown distribution
p data. And we can never access p data because we don't have this omniscient view of exactly how the universe
works, but instead we get some samples from p data that the universe has given to us.
And what we're trying to do through our learning procedure is uncover that unknown distribution p data given a finite number of samples
from that unknown distribution. So one procedure that you can go about this is like, well, let's select the distribution that
makes the data that I saw actually most likely, and that's the maximum likelihood objective function.
And then a standard trick that we do here, we assume that the data was IID, independent and identically distributed.
So we assume that each one of those x's was drawn from that true p data distribution. And now we want to maximize the joint distribution
of all the data that we saw. But because it's independent, we can factor it down into independent likelihood of each of the independent samples.
And then the common trick that we always use is the log trick. So that log is a monotonic function. So if you maximize something, its equivalent
to maximizing the log of that something because log is a monotonic function. And the log is also very convenient
because it swaps sums and products. So it's common to-- instead of maximizing the likelihood of the data,
instead we're going to maximize the log likelihood of the data, and that's the same as maximizing the likelihood. And once we apply the log, then that product splits into a sum,
and sums are easier to handle. And now we slot in our neural network because our neural network is now maybe directly
outputting the density. So this gives a direct objective function that we could use to train a neural network.
This gives it a very concrete loss function that we can use to train a neural network to solve this generative modeling problem.
But we need a little bit more structure here to actually make progress. So this idea of maximum likelihood estimation
is very general. It doesn't really assume anything about the data. It doesn't really assume any structure in the data.
And in general, we need to put a little bit more structure on this to make some progress. So autoregressive models basically make the assumption
that there is some canonical way that we can take our data x and split each data sample x into some sequence of subparts,
x1, x2, xT. You got to be careful with indices here. Here I said the subparts. These are subparts of a single sample.
So I use a subscript. In the previous slide, we had superscript to indicate different samples x1 to xN.
So be careful with that. Superscript on this slide is different samples x. Subscript on this slide means different parts
of the same sample. So we assume that there's some canonical way to break up our data sample x into some sequence of subparts.
And now we can apply the chain rule of probability. So probability of x is just the joint probability
of all of the subparts x1 to xT. And then given any probability distribution,
you can always break it apart into this chain rule that the joint distribution of all these variables
is equal to probability of the first one times probability of the first given-- conditioned on the first--
probability of the second condition on the first times probability of the third conditioned on the first and the second, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
And this is the chain rule of probability. This requires no assumptions. This is always true of any joint distribution
of random variables. And then this gives us our objective function.
Then you could basically train a neural network that's going to input the previous part of the sequence
and then try to give us a probability distribution over the next part of the sequence. Does that sound familiar?
Does that sound like something we've done before? RNNs, yes. So that's exactly what an RNN is doing.
An RNN has this very natural structure that by passing hidden states along forward through time,
the hidden state always depends on the beginning of the sequence up to the current point. So then there's a very natural way
to use RNNs for autoregressive modeling. So you have your sequence of hidden states that are basically summarizing your sequence.
And then from each hidden state, you predict probability of the next piece of the sequence conditioned on all earlier
parts of the sequence, and that basically is an RNN language model that we saw some lectures ago. Have we seen anything else that can do this?
Yes, transformers. And particularly masked transformers. In the transformers lecture, transformers
can also be used to have this structure where by masking out the attention matrix in the right way, we can make each output of the transformer
depend on only the prefix of the sequence. So we can also use transformers for autoregressive modeling.
And they're very commonly used for this. So this is-- but the problem with autoregressive modeling
is that you need to break your data up into a sequence. And this is very, very natural with text data because text data
is naturally a 1D sequence. And it's even a 1D sequence of discrete things, which is great because it's very easy to model probabilities
of discrete things. We've been doing that all semester with our favorite cross-entropy softmax loss.
The cross entropy softmax loss is always distribution over fixed discrete number of categories.
The network predicts a score for each one of those. Normalize it with a softmax, train with a cross-entropy loss. We know how to do that.
So that's why these things fit very naturally for language models because language is already discrete.
Language is already a 1D sequence. So there's a little bit of fuzziness in how-- there's a tokenizer in there.
We're not going to get into that. But these are very naturally well-suited to language problems because language is already 1D, it's already discrete.
Images are more tricky because images are not naturally 1D. Images are also not naturally discrete.
We often think of images as continuous, real valued things. So they don't-- these don't naturally fit quite as nicely
onto images. But you got a hammer, you're going to whack some nails. So people definitely apply autoregressive models
to images in a naive way at least some years ago. So one thing you can do, one thing you can do to model images
with autoregressive models is to treat an image as a sequence of pixels.
And in particular, each pixel is actually just three numbers. And in most displays and in most representations of images,
those numbers are actually discrete. So most JPEGs or PNGs-- most of the file formats we use to store images are typically
8-bit per channel. So there's actually only a fixed number of values that each pixel can take.
So a pixel is just three single byte values. A single byte is just like an integer from 0 to 255.
So a pixel is just three integers. Each integer can be 0 to 255. So what we can do is take our image
and then rasterize it out into a long into a long sequence where each element of the sequence
is one of the subpixel values of our image. And now we've turned our image into a one-dimensional sequence
where each entry in that sequence is a discrete value. So you can apply autoregressive modeling directly to that sequence in exactly the way that you might
have for a language model. I'm using an RNN or a transformer. Can anyone spot a problem with this approach?
[? Too ?] [? much. ?] Very expensive. Very, very expensive. So a reasonable image that you might want to model
is maybe 1024 by 1024. That's not even that high resolution, really, but that's a pretty good resolution.
But if you have 1024 by 1024 image, that's going to be a sequence of three million pixels.
People actually can model these days sequences in the millions. But it gets very, very expensive.
There's got to be a more efficient way to do this. So there were some papers a couple years ago where people applied these autoregressive models directly
to pixels of images, but they were not super successful, I think, because they are very difficult to scale to high resolution.
So a spoiler alert that we'll talk a little bit more next lecture is that this actually has made a resurgence in the last couple of years.
But the trick is to not model the individual pixels in the sequence as individual pixel values, but instead to use some other process or procedure or model,
neural network maybe, to break that image into a sequence of one dimensional tokens. So that's something we'll talk about a bit more next lecture.
But this at least gives you the sense of what is an autoregressive model. What's the probabilistic formulation of them.
How do you apply them to language. How do you apply them to images. So then from autoregressive models,
we next turn to variational autoencoders. And variational autoencoders are pretty fun.
In these autoregressive models, we talked about,
we're trying to do maximum likelihood. We broke up our data into a sequence of parts. We're trying to maximize the likelihood of the data.
And variational autoencoders are going to do something a little bit different. Instead, they're still going to be an explicit method.
They're still going to be some density that we can compute, but it's going to be intractable.
We're going to be able to approximate it. Why are we going to do that? We had a perfectly good method that computed densities exactly.
And what we're going to give up for that is we're going to gain something. We're going to gain the ability to compute reasonable latent
vectors over our data. We're going to have vectors that represent our data that pop out naturally from the learning process.
And those vectors are going to be useful in their own right. And the ability to get access to those latent vectors is going to be useful enough to us
that we're willing to give up computing exact densities, and instead settle for these approximate densities that are actually lower bounds on the true density.
Oh, the motivation for breaking stuff up in a sequence in autoregressive models because it factors the problem.
It makes each part easier to model. So imagine you're doing language modeling,
And you have a vocabulary of V words. And I want to model the probability of two words
jointly. How many possible two word sequences are there? There's V squared. How many possible three word sequences are there?
There's V cubed. And in general, if you have how many T word sequences with a vocabulary V are there?
It's V to the T. So that's bad. It grows exponentially. If you want it to directly model the joint distribution
of a sequence of T things, the number of entries in that discrete probability distribution
you need to model is going to grow exponentially with the sequence length. And that's quickly going to become completely intractable
if we want to go to long sequences. So then the reason we break that up is so that we don't have to model it all at once.
We factor it in this way and predict only one part condition on the previous parts. Good question. Can we apply the log trick to mitigate that?
Yeah, exactly. So in practice, you'll never actually see these probability density values modeled.
Almost always you're going to work in log probabilities instead. So the model is going to output log probabilities.
You're going to compute your loss in log space. For numeric stability, you're almost going to compute everything in log space in practice.
So then the p of x is being generated because at the top of the transformer, it's outputting a probability distribution
over the next token conditioned on all the previous tokens. And it does that for every point in the sequence. So you could actually recover this exact probability density
value by multiplying out the values that all points in the sequence. So if I have an input sequence, I
pass it through the transformer, the transformer will have predicted at every point in the sequence, what
is the distribution over all the tokens conditioned on the earlier part of the sequence. And I can compute what was the actual next token, what
was the predicted probability of the next token, and then multiply all of those across the entire sequence. So that's how we can recover the exact density value out
of one of these autoregressive models. And that actually would apply either to an RNN or a transformer.
Good questions. So then in a variational autoencoder, things get hairy.
So we're actually going to drop the V and talk about autoencoders for just a couple of slides because I don't think we've done that yet this course.
So in a variational autoencoder, this is basically going to be an unsupervised method for learning to extract features z from inputs x without labels.
And this actually is in this vein of self-supervised learning that we just talked about.
And our notion is that the features ought to extract useful information about the data. Maybe they somehow implicitly encode
what is the identity of objects in the image, how many of them there are? What are the colors of them?
We want this feature vector z to contain useful information about the input x.
And this encoder itself could be a neural network of any architecture. It could be an MLP, transformer, CNN, whatever you want.
But inputs are data x. And then it's going to output some vector z. And then the question is, how do we this without labels.
We actually saw a lot of examples of this in the previous lecture. But there's a very simple one, which is just try to reconstruct the input.
So we're going to now have a second part of the model called the decoder, which is going to input the z and then output
back an x. And we want-- oh, and I dropped the x. And we're going to train this thing
so that the output from the model should actually match the input. In some sense, the stupidest loss function ever.
We're just training the model to mimic the identity function. Why do we do that? We already know the identity function. Why are we spending a lot of flops
and training a neural network on a big data set to just learn the identity function that we already know? It's because we're going to bottleneck it in some way.
If this model had infinite capacity, for example, if that z vector was very wide, if there were no constraints on the learning, I would expect a neural network
to just nail this problem. But we don't want to do that because we explicitly don't care about learning this objective.
We already know the identity function. We don't need an expensive neural network to compute it. What we want to do is force the network
to try to learn the identity function under some constraint. And the constraint that you often use in a traditional autoencoder is by bottlenecking
that representation z. In particular, that means that that vector z in the middle is going to be much, much smaller than the input x.
So your input x might be a high resolution image, maybe a 1024 by 1024 image that we said is composed
of three million floats. But then that z might be like 128 dimensional latent code.
So the model is now asked to solve this problem where I want to reconstruct the output-- reconstruct the data x but squash it
through this bottleneck representation in the middle. And we hope that this is going to force the model
to learn some nontrivial structure about the data by squashing it through this representation
in the middle of the network. And then after we do this, we can apply our normal self-supervised learning trick
where you could throw away the decoder, and then use this Z to initialize some supervised model for some downstream task.
The same story as in the self-supervised story that we just saw. But what about-- what if we want actually
want to use this to generate data? Then, what we'd really like to do is somehow the opposite of the self-supervised story.
What we'd really like to do is throw away the encoder, and instead be able to somehow sample z's that match the z's
that the model learns to represent data as. And if we had some procedure for sampling z's that
matched the data distribution in some way, then we could sample a z, pass it through our learned decoder,
and now generate a new sample. And now this is an implicit method. You said that there's no densities floating around
anywhere. But if we had a way to do this, it would be a way to draw samples from the model
without explicitly modeling the density in any way. But the problem is that we've just kicked the can down
the road here a little bit because we said if we want to generate images, we want to generate x's.
We have a dataset of x's. How do we do that? We said we're going to solve that by training this autoencoder.
And now we have a dataset of z's, and we need to sample in z space. It's not any easier. So we're stuck.
And the idea of variational autoencoders is, what if we could force some structure on the z's.
If you have this traditional autoencoder structure, you're not forcing the model to impose any known structure
on the z's. You're just asking it to reconstruct the data given its latent representation. But what if we had some mechanism
to force the z's to come from a Gaussian distribution, or some other known distribution? If that were the case, then we could just draw a sample
at inference time. After this model is trained, draw a sample from that known distribution, pass it through the decoder,
and now we would have our sample. So forcing these autoencoders to be probabilistic
and to enforce a probabilistic structure on that latent space exactly is what a variational autoencoder tries to do.
Why variational? It's a long story. It says it has a long history around that terminology
in the literature. But basically, variational autoencoders are a probabilistic spin on our traditional autoencoder.
So it's going to learn latent features z from raw data. And then we'll be able to enforce a structure on that
learned latent space z such that we can sample from it at inference time after the model is trained
and generate new samples. So more concretely, we'll assume that our training data xi--
again, note here the superscript i means these are different independent samples of x. We assume that each xi was generated
from some underlying latent vector z, that there's some zi that's lurking under the surface
associated with every xi. And in the universe's procedure for generating data, first it generated the z, then it generated the xi from the zi.
Everything that the universe needed to know in order to generate the image that we saw was contained in that latent vector z.
But we can't see those latent vector z. We can never observe them. We don't have a data set of them. So the intuition is that x an image, z is some latent feature
representation that tells you everything you would ever need to know about that image, but you can never observe that latent vector.
And then after training, we could generate a sample by-- oh, and the other constraint is that we're going to force those z's to come from a known distribution.
So then after the model is trained, then we can do exactly what we just said. Draw a z from that known distribution,
pass through the decoder, that's going to give us a sample. And then we'll typically assume a simple prior.
Almost always a unit Gaussian distribution is by far the most common. So then how do we possibly train this?
This feels like an impossible problem. We want to basically train this network that's going to get these z's, find a z for every x.
We can never observe the z's. This seems impossible. What are we going to do? We're going to go back to a maximum likelihood.
If we indeed had a dataset of x's and z's, then, we could use maximum likelihood to directly use the same log
trick-- maximize the log probability. We could use the exact same thing that we previously saw. And then train a conditional generative model
p of x conditioned on z. But we don't know z. But let's pretend we do for a moment.
Because we don't know z, we could try to marginalize. We know that p of x is equal to-- maybe
there's some joint distribution of x and z that must exist even though we can't observe it. And then in principle, you could integrate out
the z to marginalize over it to get a p of x. And then maybe we could pretend there's a joint distribution x
and z, marginalize out the z somehow, and still do maximum likelihood.
Let's see how this works. So this term in-- and then here we've also used the chain rule to break up that p of x given z that joint probability p of x and z
into p of x given z and just p of z. So this p of x given z, that's OK.
We could compute that with our decoder here on the left, that's a neural network that we're hoping to train. This p of z term is OK.
We're going to assume that that's a unit Gaussian or some other simple distribution that we can compute or reason about.
But this integral kills us. In general, we have no feasible way to integrate over the full space of a neural network's input.
This p of x given z is going to be some very complicated function that's modeled by a neural network. There's going to be no way that we can analytically
or exactly integrate this. You can train neural networks for individual parts here. So the whole underlying notion here,
whenever you're doing this probabilistic modeling is like we're going to write down some probabilistic terms. Hopefully some of them are going to be simple distributions
that we can write down analytically and reason about. Some of them are going to be learned neural network components. So we're assuming that probability of x given
z is going to be some neural network that we could, in principle, learn via maximum likelihood.
But we're starting to write down what objective could we use to learn that neural network via maximum likelihood.
And we're out of luck here because you have no way to integrate over z. You could try to approximate that integral
via some finite sampling, but in general, that's probably not going to work very well because the z is a super high dimensional space and doing
an approximate numerical integral in the inner loop of your training is not going to be a very good idea.
So we could try something else. Bayes rule, that's the other thing we always do in probability. So let's try Bayes' rule.
If we have Bayes' rule, we have another formula that we can use to write down p of x.
So p of x we can write down using Bayes' rule in this equation on the screen.
Let's see what we can do with these terms. So this one, p of x given z, again, we can compute that with our decoder.
P of z, again OK, this one's-- we assume this is Gaussian, so we can compute something with it. There's no integrals here.
That's good. So we're in good shape. But now we're out of luck, this p of z given x term.
This posterior of z given x, we have no good way to compute this. In order to compute this term, you
would also need some kind of integral out of luck. We can't compute it. What are we going to do?
Let's use another neural network. So the variational autoencoder trick is like there's use that probabilistic term on the bottom
here, a Bayes rule that we can't compute, let's just slot in another neural network to try to compute it for us.
So we're going to have another neural network q with different weights phi that's going to learn a different conditional distribution
probability of z given x. And the whole thing is we want this other neural network to try to approximate the true p of x given
z of the first neural network. And you can't really enforce this in general, but let's put a neural network there and see what we can do.
So then if we could somehow have this other neural network that was approximating this term on the bottom that we can't compute, then we could go and compute
our likelihood and do maximum likelihood, and we would all be set.
So that's what we do when training a variational autoencoder. We're basically going to jointly learn two different neural networks.
One is the decoder, which inputs the latent code z and outputs a distribution over the data x.
The other is an encoder, which is going to input the data x and output a distribution
over the latent codes z. And each of these are going to be separate neural networks that are separately trained with their own independent weights.
There's a question you might have which is, how can you possibly output a probability distribution from a neural network?
That seems confusing and hard and unclear. So the trick here is we're going to actually force everything
to be a normal distribution. And we're going to have the neural network output the parameters of the normal distribution.
So typically for the decoder network, we're going to assume that the output distribution from the decoder is going
to be diagonal Gaussian where the entries in the diagonal are the pixels of the neural network.
And the model is going to output the mean of that diagonal Gaussian distribution. And typically for the decoder, we'd
assume a fixed variance or standard deviation sigma squared. Now, for the encoder network, same idea.
The model is going to input the data sample x. And then it's going to output the parameters of a Gaussian distribution that model the distribution q of z given x.
So in this case, the encoder network will output one vector, which is the mean of that Gaussian
distribution, and another vector, which is the diagonal of the covariance of that Gaussian distribution.
And here it's very important that we assume the diagonal structure, because otherwise we would have to model h squared entries in that full covariance
matrix. So here you imagine an image that's h by w pixels,
so that means that the entries in your diagonal matrix are like the full--
You could in principle model the full covariance across every pair of pixels in the image, but that would require h squared w squared entries,
and that would be too big. So instead we'll just ignore any correlation structure among the different values.
And now that means that the diagonal covariance is now a vector that's the same size as the data itself.
So that means this mu of z given x. And this sigma of z given x are both vectors of the same shape as z.
So we basically have the neural network output two vectors of the same shape, and then treat them
as the parameters of this Gaussian distribution. So that's how we can output a distribution from a neural network.
If you do maximum likelihood on this thing with a fixed standard deviation, it actually
becomes equivalent to L2, and that's a nice trick. And the reason you want to do that is because trying to model the diagonal--
you could, in principle, try to model the same thing on the decoder and try to model a separate variance
of every pixel. But that would be useless because that would be-- if you're not modeling any covariance structure
among the pixels, that would basically be saying that each pixel is allowed to vary a little bit, and the amount that each pixel is allowed to vary
depends on the pixel. And then sampling from that distribution would basically amount to fixing the mean
and then adding per pixel independent noise that's scaled by the per pixel variances, and that would not be a sensible thing to do.
So in general, for the decoder, you cheat a little bit-- you pretend it's outputting a probability distribution,
but in general we're never going to sample from that distribution. Instead we're always going to output the mean. Does that make sense?
Yeah. And then it turns out if you write this down that constant sigma squared just comes off
as a constant in the front. And in practice, all maximizing the log likelihood of a Gaussian
distribution with a fixed variance along the diagonal is equivalent to minimizing L2 distance between the mean
and the x, which is nice. Yeah, a good question. Is there some weird invariance or noninvariace structure
here of what the pixel shifting? That would be more a property of the architecture that you would choose to build the neural network.
So you could try to build into your network architecture that's predicting these. You could try to build some invariance or equivariance
properties into the architecture. But yeah, you're right that, in general, that's not accounted for at the loss level here.
So now we've got this idea. We've got an encoder, a decoder.
But one is inputting x, outputting a distribution over z, other is inputting a distribution over x.
What's our training objective? And here's the one slide where we're going to do some math. But we'll see.
So here we're going to-- basically the idea is we want to do maximum likelihood. That's usually the single thing that we
want-- that's the guiding principle behind a lot of objectives in generative modeling. So we want to maximize log p of x.
And then we can use Bayes' rule to write that as log p of this Bayes rule expression. This is an exact equivalence.
Now we're going to do something silly. We're going to multiply the top and bottom of this by our q of z given x.
Remember, we just introduced another neural network q out of nowhere that was modeling this other distribution
q of z given x. And now we're going to multiply that density term on the top and bottom of this Bayes rule expression.
Now we're going to do some logarithm math. And if you have some foresight, you'll for some reason
decide to rearrange these terms in this particular order. And I've color coded them so you can later go and track which term went where.
But we do some logarithms and break this up into three separate terms.
Now, you need to make another magical observation, which is that this p of x actually does not depend on z.
So far, this sequence of three terms, this is all in exact equivalence. These are all exact equalities.
So even though there's a z in this expression-- we actually doesn't depend on z because all the z's would cancel out.
And if you have something that doesn't depend on z, you can always wrap an expectation over z
of that thing. So in this case, we know that this is our p of x. We can always feel free to wrap an expectation of z sampled
according to any distribution that we want of p of x. And because that internal thing does not depend on z,
this is always true for any distribution that we might choose to take this expectation over.
So then because expectation is a linear thing, we can apply that expectation to each of these three terms
upstairs. And now we have these three terms, each of which looks very mysterious.
But if you had a lot of intuition about probability, you memorize all these formulas that you
may have seen in an earlier statistics or probability course, maybe you could learn to recognize some of these.
So this first one we're going to carry down as it was before. And the second two are actually KL terms.
So the KL divergence is a measure of dissimilarity between probability distributions.
And it just so happens to have this exact definition of these latter two terms. So we can rewrite this exactly as this first term, which
is this expectation blah, blah, blah, we'll talk about it, And then plus these two other KL terms.
So these two KL terms are basically measuring discrepancy or dissimilarity
between these different probability distributions that we have floating around on this slide. And now these all look crazy.
But if we stare at each of these terms, we can actually recover an interpretable meaning
for each of these three terms. This first one is actually a data reconstruction term. If we walk through what this is saying,
this is saying that we're going to sample a z. And the way we're going to sample the z is by q of z
given x, which is our encoder. So we're going to take our x, pass it to the encoder. The encoder is going to predict a distribution q of z given x.
Then from that predicted distribution, we're going to sample a z. Then we're going to take an expectation over all such z
and maximize the log probability of x given z. So this is basically a data reconstruction term.
It's saying that if we take an x, a data point x, run it through the encoder to get a distribution over z,
and then pass any sample of that predicted distribution over z into the decoder, we're going to recover x.
So this is a data reconstruction term. The middle one is a prior term. This is saying we want to--
this is measuring the KL divergence between q of z given x and p of z. So remember, q of z given x, this is the encoder,
is inputting the data x and outputting a distribution over the latent space z.
So this is the predicted distribution over the latent space of the encoder. And this other term p of z, this is the prior.
This is the prior that we assumed for the latent space, usually diagonal Gaussian. So this term is basically saying,
well, the model is separately predicting-- is predicting distributions of z given x,
and we want those predicted distributions to match the simple Gaussian prior that we had previously set, that we had previously chosen.
So this is just measuring how much does that latent space that's learned by our model match the prior.
And this third term gets us in trouble. So this third term is q of z given
x, so that's the predicted distribution over z given the input data x to the encoder, and how much
does that match p of z given x? So that's this flipped around distribution of what
the decoder is modeling. And this one we're out of luck. We cannot compute this term because remember what got us
into trouble in the first place was this p of z given x. The whole reason we introduced q was because we could not
compute this p of z given x. So now what do we do?
We're going to throw it away. Because we know that KL divergences are always greater than or equal to 0, so we know that this last term,
because it's KL divergence of two distributions, Even though we cannot compute those distributions, in general, we know that it must be greater than 0
because that's a well-known property of KL divergences. So we can throw it away and get a lower bound
to the true probability. So if we throw away that last term, then we know that log p of x is greater than
or equal to those two terms, are reconstruction term and our prior term. So this will be the loss that we use to train
our variational autoencoder. And the idea is that this is an approximation to the true log
likelihood. This is a lower bound to the log likelihood. So if we maximize the lower bound, hopefully that will also maximize the true log likelihood
even though we're not doing it exactly. So that's our training objective for variational autoencoders.
So that's the summary. You're going to jointly train an encoder q and a decoder p
to maximize what's called a variational lower bound on the true data log likelihood.
And this is also sometimes called the evidence lower bound or ELBo. So it's just the ELBo. We're going to maximize the ELBo.
And it has this particular term. We have these encoder network this decoder network. That's what we do.
So then to walk through what the training procedure looks like more explicitly, we're going
to have this neural network encoder, inputs the x, outputs the distribution over z, then
we're going to apply this KL term to the predicted distribution. And in particular, because this is
going to force the predicted distribution to be unit Gaussian, so it's basically going to force-- it's going to encourage the predicted
mean to be 0 and the predicted sigma to be all ones.
Then once we get those predicted distribution from the encoder, we're going to sample from that predicted distribution
using this so-called reparameterization trick that allows you to backprop through this. So then we draw a sample z from the predicted distribution.
Once you get this sample z, you run it through your decoder to get your normal distribution predicted by the decoder,
and then you apply your reconstruction term of the loss to the output of the decoder.
So even though this looked like a large, scary slides of math, it actually led to not too crazy of a training objective
for this thing. And I think this variational autoencoder is actually very interesting because these two
losses fight against each other in a very interesting way. Because we're basically forcing the model
to bottleneck through this latent space z, and these two terms want different things
from the latent space, so the reconstruction loss wants the sigma to be 0 and the mu
x to be a different and unique vector for each data x. Because if that were the case, then
we could perfectly satisfy the reconstruction objective. We would have a separate unique vector for every data point.
And there would be no probability in there. We could perfectly reconstruct everything. So that's what the reconstruction loss wants.
But the prior loss actually wants the sigmas to be all one because it wants it wants it to be unit Gaussian,
and it wants all the mu's to be 0 which is very different from what the two losses want. So in the process of training a VAE,
you're asking these two losses to fight against each other to try to find some equilibrium between reconstructing
your data well and forcing your latent space to be close to your prior. And then once you've trained it, then you
can sample z from your prior, run through the decoder, and get a sample. Another nice thing is that because your latent space was
diagonal Gaussian, there's also a notion of statistical independence across the different entries
in your latent space z. So you can vary them separately. And maybe those separate dimensions often encode something useful or interpretable or orthogonal
about your data. So in this case, we took a VAE, trained it on a data set of handwritten digits. And you see that as we vary two dimensions of the latent space,
the digits smoothly morph from one category into another. And this is a pretty common property of VAEs.
So that's basically it for today. To recap what we talked about, we talked about supervised versus unsupervised learning.
We talked about these three different flavors of generative modeling. And then we talked about one branch of this family
tree of generative models. So then next time, we're going to come back and talk
about the other half of the family tree of generative models, in particular, talking about generative adversarial networks and diffusion models.

So last time we were talking about generative models. And we started off with some discussion of generative
versus discriminative models and recall that these were basically both different flavors of probabilistic models,
but it depends on what we're trying to predict, what we're conditioning on, and really critically what we're normalizing over. So we talked about discriminative models
where you're trying to predict the label y conditioned on your data x, generative models where you're trying to just learn a probability distribution over your data x,
and conditional generative models where you want to model the data x conditioned on some user input y or label y.
And recall that these differ in that what you're trying to normalize over because probabilities
distributions introduce this normalizing effect where different kinds of things need to compete for probability mass
due to this normalization constraint of probability distributions. And last time we also went through this taxonomy
of different categories of generative models because it turns out this area of generative modeling has been something people have studied
for a very long time, come up with a lot of different categories of methods to try to solve variants of these problems. So we went through this family tree of generative models
where last time we talked about these explicit density models where the model outputs some quantity
p of x, either the exact predicted p of x in the case of tractable density models,
or some approximate version of p of x in the case of these approximate density models. And then in the case of tractable density,
we saw autoregressive as a category of model and we saw variational autoencoders as an example of something that gives you
some approximate density. So recall that autoregressive models, what we did is we took our image or more generally whatever kind of data
we're working with and we break it up into a sequence. And then for the case of image data, we typically treat this as a sequence of pixel values or even
subpixel values. And we usually want these to be discrete. So you treat those pixel values as 8-bit integers that can each
take a value of 0 to 255. You string this out into a long sequence of integers
and then model this using some discrete autoregressive sequence model, typically an RNN or a transformer.
Then we also saw the variational autoencoders, which were another explicit density model,
but now they compute not the exact density but some approximation to the density, in particular a lower bound to the density.
So to do this, we jointly trained some encoder network which is going to input the data x and output a distribution over latent codes z
and a decoder network, which is going to input a latent code z and output a predicted piece of data x.
And we were able to jointly train these two networks, the encoder and the decoder,
to maximize this variational lower bound to our likelihood function. Recall that maximum likelihood is
one of the key insights behind all generative modeling that often our objective function for training generative
models is somehow to maximize the likelihood of the data that we observe that comes from our true data distribution.
So today we're going to continue our discussion of generative models and explore this other half of the family tree, these implicit density models.
So in implicit density models we are no longer going to get access to some actual density value p of x,
but these models will implicitly model the probability distribution. And even though we can't compute a density value
p of x for any piece of data x, we will be able to sample from the underlying distribution that these models learn.
So we'll be able to draw samples from the learned distribution even if we can't output an actual density value.
So the first such model that we'll explore are generative adversarial networks or usually called GANs.
And it's useful to contrast GANs with variational autoencoders and autoregressive models that we've seen so far.
So like we just said, autoregressive models are a likelihood based method. Their training objective is maximum likelihood.
So you write down this parameterized function that is your P of x, where x is a piece of data
and then you maximize this over the data that you observe trying to do maximum likelihood. And variational autoencoders follow this similar idea
where we write down this approximation to p of x and then maximize that approximation to p of x.
And now very generative adversarial networks will do something a little bit different. They will give up on directly modeling that p of x as we just
said, but even though they don't explicitly model the p of x or let us get out those density values,
they will give us some way to sample from the underlying distribution that the model is fitting.
So the setup here is that we'll start by having some finite samples of data, Xi,
which are assumed to be drawn from some true data distribution pdata. And our goal is we want to be able to draw samples from pdata
and recall pdata is something like the true distribution of the universe. This is the distribution that the universe uses to give you
samples of your data. And this is likely a very complicated distribution. It involves physics. It involves history.
It involves sociopolitical constraints maybe. There's a lot of complication that goes into all the stuff happening
in the universe that gives rise to the data that you see. And somehow we want to fit some approximate model
that tries to match that true data distribution as well as possible and that allows us to draw new samples from our fitted distribution that
look like the original data samples that we observed. So the way that we're going to do this is by introducing a latent variable z.
This looks kind of like the latent variable z that we saw in variational autoencoders, where it's going to give where this latent variable z is going
to be distributed according to some known prior distribution p of z that we will write down and control ourselves.
And usually this is going to be a unit Gaussian or a uniform distribution, but typically a unit Gaussian, something very simple
that we know how to sample from, we know the analytical properties of. And now the setup is that we're going
to imagine some data generating process that our network is going to model. So here we're going to imagine that we sample a z according
to our known distribution p of z to get a sample z, pass that sample z through a generator network, g of z.
And then that x is going to be a sample from some generator distribution PG.
And as we vary the parameters or the architecture or the training of our generator network,
that is going to induce different kinds of distributions that we sample from in this PG distribution.
So the whole goal in GAN training is to try to force this PG distribution, which is induced by our generator network.
We want that PG distribution to match the true P data distribution as close as possible. And because if they match, then we could sample a z,
pass it through our generator and now we have a sample of sampled piece of data that looks a lot like our P data.
So the picture for this is something like the following. And we'll imagine sampling z from our pz to get a concrete latent z, pass it through our generator G
and that will give us a generated image. So the generator network basically is trained to convert a sample from a known distribution, z,
into a sample of our data distribution. But now the question is, how can we force these outputs?
How can we force the induced generator distribution PG? How can we force this to match the data distribution pdata?
And the trick in generative adversarial networks is that we're going to introduce another neural network to do that task for us.
In the previous versions of generative modeling, VAEs and autoregressive models, we tried
to write down some objective function that we could minimize that would force our fit distribution to match the data distribution.
Here we're going to relinquish that control and basically ask another neural network to solve that task for us.
So in particular, we're going to train another neural network called the discriminator, D. And this discriminator
is going to be tasked with inputting an image, sometimes a real image, sometimes a fake image.
And it's going to classify whether that image was fake or real. And then the idea is that these two networks are going to fight.
We're going to train the generator to try to fool the discriminator, and we're going to train the discriminator as a classification model to try to correctly discriminate
or classify between real data and fake data. And the intuition is that as these two networks fight, then
ideally the discriminator will get better. It will get really good. The discriminator will get really good at determining features of real data from fake data.
And once the discriminator gets really good, then in order to fool the discriminator into thinking that the generated samples are classified as real,
the generator data will need to get closer and closer to producing samples that look like true data.
So that's the kind of intuition between generative adversarial networks. So a question is does the generator network get feedback
from the discriminator on whether it's classifying correctly? Yes and that's crucial for this whole process working.
And the type of feedback it gets is gradients. This whole thing, this composite system
of the generator and the discriminator are just neural networks. We know how to compute gradients through those
and those communicate through that generated image. So we're going to back propagate from the discriminator all the way through the generated image into the generator.
So that's how the generator is going to learn from the discriminator. And then more concretely we need to write down
some actual equations, some actual math that we're going to use to concretize this intuition.
So in particular, we're going to jointly train the generator G and the discriminator D with this minimax game.
This equation looks maybe a little bit daunting so we'll walk through each of the terms one by one. So here we're going to color code this
and say that the generator is going to be in blue, the discriminator is going to be in red. And the discriminator is going to be a function that
inputs a piece of data x and outputs the probability that data is real. So in particular, D of x equals 0
means that the discriminator has classified that piece of data x as fake. D of x equals 1 means that the discriminator has classified
that piece of data as real. Of course, those are the extreme cases. The discriminator in practice will output some probability
that gives you a soft version in between those two decisions. Now imagine what happens if we fix the generator G.
And just imagine this problem from the perspective of the discriminator. So then from the perspective of the discriminator
there's two terms here. One, this first term says the discriminator wants
D of x equals 1 for real data. Remember D of x equals 1 means that the discriminator
says that it's real. And this expectation basically says we're going to draw data samples x from the true pdata
distribution. We're going to pass those through the discriminator and then take a log because we almost always work in log space
when working with probabilities. And remember log is a monotonic function. So maximizing log of x is the same as maximizing x.
So in this case, this is saying that we want to maximize log of D of x for real data, which
is equivalent to saying D of x equals 1 for real data. Now on the other side this is saying
that we're going to take an expectation by sampling priors z-- sorry, sampling latents z according to our known
prior p of z. We're going to take those z's pass them through the generator, which should give us a generated data
sample, and then pass that generated data sample through the discriminator. And now the discriminator wants to classify
as these are fake samples. So the discriminator wants to classify these as fake so we need to somehow invert
that expression on the left. So here we want D of x equals 0 to be fake.
So one way to say that is maximize log of 1 minus D of G of z.
So this term on the right says the discriminator wants D of x equals 0 for fake data. And the term on the left says discriminator wants
D of x equals 1 for real data. OK, so that's what the discriminator is trying to do. The discriminator is trying to correctly just do
this classification task between generated samples and real samples from our data set
and try to classify them correctly as real or fake. Now look at this from the perspective of the generator.
So imagine fixing the discriminator and looking at this setup only from the perspective of a generator with a fixed discriminator.
Now in this case, this first term doesn't depend on the generator at all because this first term was just about getting the discriminator
to correctly classify the real data samples. So the generator only cares about this term on the right.
And intuitively, we want the generator to fool the discriminator into thinking that its samples are real.
So that means that the generator wants D of x equals 1 for fake data.
So the term is the same. We draw a sample z according to p of z, pass it through the generator to get a generated sample,
pass it through the discriminator to get the discriminator's predicted probability on that sample.
And now recall the generator wants D of x equals 1. So rather than maximizing this like the discriminator wanted
to, instead we're going to try to minimize this from the perspective of the generator.
And that gives us this minimax game. So in particular, we can abstract away all this math by writing it as some scalar function v
as a function of G and D. And then we say that the discriminator wants to maximize v,
the generator wants to minimize v and they're going to fight against each other in that way.
And then to optimize this we're going to basically run some gradient descent loop taking alternating steps trying
to minimize and maximize this with respect to the parameters of the generator and discriminator. So loop while true forever, then update
D according to take a gradient descent step, derivative of v with respect to D and then step plus that gradient
because remember, discriminator is trying to maximize this, so we want to do gradient ascent to try to maximize this term.
And then after we make an update on the discriminator weights, then we'll make an update on the generator weights
by taking derivative of that V with respect to the generator weights G, and now take a gradient descent step on V
because the generator wants to minimize that objective. So that's basically our training.
That's basically the way that we train generative adversarial networks. We've got this thing, V, which is
the value of our minimax game. And we're going to take alternating gradient ascent and gradient descent weights on that objective V alternatingly
update the generator and discriminator. And one thing that's really important to realize when we're training generative adversarial networks
is that this V is not a loss function. That means there is no-- the absolute value of V basically
does not tell us anything about how well the generator and discriminator are solving this problem or how well--
or really, the thing we care about is how well is that induced PG distribution matching the data
distribution. And just looking at the value of V doesn't really tell us anything about that because the value of V depends on how
good the discriminator is. If the discriminator is really bad, then it's really easy for the generator to fool this and get good numbers
or if the discriminator is really good, then the generator has to be really good. So there can be different settings of D and G
that will lead to the exact same value for V. And that means that generative adversarial networks are often really hard to train and even hard to tell when they are
doing a good job at training. Normally when you train neural networks, you have a loss. You try to minimize the loss with respect
to the parameters of your network and you want to see that loss go down over the course of training, but you don't have that with generative adversarial networks.
You have the generator loss. You have the discriminator loss. You can try to plot them, but in general, they're pretty meaningless.
So with generative adversarial networks, they're really hard to train. I think, one, this objective is fundamentally unstable.
You're trying to do jointly maximize and minimize the same quantity with respect to different sets of parameters
of the network so that's kind of inherently a difficult optimization problem. And then even worse, you don't have any value
to look at to tell whether or not you're making progress towards a good solution. So generative adversarial networks,
they're pretty effective, but they're really hard to train and really hard to tune and really hard to make progress on.
So that's the main takeaway for generative adversarial networks. There is one little trick that is kind of useful to think
about for when training GANs is that just to imagine the training dynamics of these things.
So at the very start, imagine at the very beginning of training your generators randomly initialize, your discriminator is randomly initialized.
What's going to happen? Well, at the very start of training then your generator is producing completely random noise.
That completely random noise is going to look very different from real images. So at the very beginning of training when the generator is
terrible, then the discriminator has a very easy problem. So typically within a couple iterations
the discriminator can really immediately pick up between real images and these totally garbage random fake images that the random generator is giving you.
So that means that at the very start of training the discriminator is quickly going to learn to classify these real and fake pretty quickly
with pretty high probability. So then it's interesting to plot what is D of G of z?
Sorry, what is this term as a function of D of G of z
because that's basically the loss function from the perspective of the generator. So then from the perspective of the generator,
we're at the beginning of training somewhere all the way over here. So the discriminator is doing a really good job
at treating generated samples as fake, classifying them as fake at the beginning of training, which means that
from the discriminator's perspective, it's trying to optimize a loss function that looks something like this. And if you'll notice something, this loss function
is flat or very close to flat at the place where the generator is trying to optimize its parameters.
So this means that in practice when you use this naive objective for training GANs, then
the generator has a really hard time learning at the beginning of training. Oh, good question is how do you assemble the data set?
How do we generate a photo of a unicorn if no unicorn exists? So this pdata, that's your choice of pdata.
So whatever data set you happen to assemble from your training set, that's choosing what is the pdata that you're trying to model.
So in general, if you want to generate a sample of a thing that looks nothing like anything that you've ever seen before, you're out of luck.
It's not going to happen. So the only way that you're generally going to draw samples is if you have something in your training data set
that looks kind of like that. So all generative models and all neural networks
really do generalize a little bit. So then the hope is that maybe you've never seen a photorealistic image of a unicorn wearing
a Santa Claus hat, but you've seen photorealistic images of horses, you've seen photorealistic images of Santa
Claus hats, you've seen drawings of unicorns, you've seen drawings of horses and somehow you've got enough stuff, even if you've never
seen the exact composition of attributes that you want to generate, you've seen enough stuff that's close enough to it
that the model can generalize and give you something new. And that's always the hope here. What does this look like from the discriminator's perspective?
So then, well, then if I generated this image of a photorealistic unicorn wearing a Santa Claus hat, then maybe all the textures are really perfect,
the lighting is perfect, the shadows are perfect, the leaves are perfect, so there's no real evidence in that sample itself to say
that this is obviously wrong. Maybe if the discriminator was really, really smart, then the discriminator could somehow
know that unicorns don't really exist, and having a perfectly photorealistic image of them isn't likely to happen, but that's a pretty hard semantic
problem to solve. So in practice, discriminators tend not to really be that smart.
Yeah, good question. The idea is why don't we look at two curves? Why don't we look at one curve saying how good the discriminator is?
Why don't we look at one curve saying how good the generator is? Feel free to plot them. They tend to look really useless.
And there's probably literally hundreds of research papers of people trying to solve this problem and figure out how do we tweak the GAN objective?
How do we not use a log? How do we use a Wasserstein something, Something-something? Put all kinds of crazy stuff into this
to make those curves more interpretable. Hundreds of papers written about it, five years of thousands
of people's time, I don't think anybody came up with a good solution. So still, even after hundreds, thousands of papers training
GANs, a lot of people still end up using this vanilla formulation, which tends not to give you very interpretable curves even
when you split it up that way. The question is what happens to the discriminator early in training really important?
And the answer is no because this is unlike any other classification problem we've ever seen before because this is a non-stationary distribution.
When you train an image classifier on ImageNet or CIFAR or something like that, the data set is fixed and the model is just trying to classify
that static data set well. But in the case of GAN training, the data set that it's trying to fit is changing under it
during the course of training because even at the beginning of training, maybe the generated images look really bad, it's easy to solve the problem,
but then the generator gets better. And now the data set that the discriminator is trying to discriminate changes under it
during the course of training. So that means that it's a non-stationary problem and with very complicated learning dynamics.
Yeah, good question. Do these get caught in local minima? Are there way to kick them out of local minima,
train for a while, kick them out? I think again, hundreds of papers, thousands of papers, lots of heuristics, nothing really stuck.
Correct, so you have to train this end to end. So gradients from the discriminator always propagate into the generator so in particular
through this term on the right. So the only way that you're ever getting gradients onto the generator's parameters is actually
through the discriminator. I mean, unless you have some regularizer in here, but there's no auxiliary term that's
telling the generator what to do other than the gradients that gets through the discriminator. And that's again leading to part of the unstable learning
problem. Correct, so that pdata distribution, that's going to stay fixed over the course of training.
All right. So we said there's this problem that the generator gets low gradients at the course of training. There's a little hack here where rather
than trying to maximize log of 1 minus D of G of z, you can instead minimize minus log of D of G of z instead.
You can convince yourself offline that those are roughly equivalent, but the TL;DR is then it gives you a better curve
for the generator to get better gradients at the start of training. So that's really important. And whenever you're training GANs
from scratch using this log objective, then this trick to use the modified loss for the generator
is really important in practice. So that means that there actually is a one V that you're computing for the generator, a different V
that you're computing for the discriminator and they aren't quite the same. OK, there's another question of why
might this be a good objective. And I used to have slides that walked through this proof step
by step, but I don't think we have time for that today. So I'll just give you the TL;DR and we can refer you
to something offline to check, but the TL;DR is that this objective is good because you can write down this optimal
discriminator. So this is a nested optimization problem where there's an inner maximization over D,
an outer minimization over G. So if you do a little bit of math, you can actually solve this in this inner maximization problem
and write down what is the optimal discriminator. This should actually be the-- this
is the optimal discriminator with respect to a particular generator G. And you can just write this down. Of course even though you can write it down,
you can never compute it because it depends on pdata. And you can never compute pdata because if you
had access to the pdata density, you'd be done. So you can write this down as an equation on a slide or on a piece of paper, but you can never compute it.
And then once you have this inner objective, once you have maximized this inner objective by writing down
the optimal discriminator, then you can show that the outer objective is minimized if and only if PG of x is equal to pdata.
So at least theoretically the optimum state of both the discriminator and the generator
actually occurs uniquely when PG is equal to pdata. So that makes us feel good, but there's
a lot of caveats to that theoretical result. The one is that they both assume infinite potential capacity
for G and D, that those both assume that your generator and discriminator can in principle represent
any function, which of course, they can't because they are neural networks of a fixed size and capacity. This also tells us absolutely nothing about
whether or not we will converge to this solution. So even though there is this optimum point in this objective landscape, this
tells us absolutely nothing about whether we can ever reach there via this gradient descent, gradient ascent, especially with a finite number of data samples.
So there's some sort of comforting theoretical result that there is some theoretical justification to GANs,
but in practice, this doesn't really hold or give us very strong guarantees.
So these GANs in practice, your generator G and your discriminator D, both are
going to be parametrized as neural networks. And they used to be CNNs. The GANs kind of fell out of favor
before VITs became popular, but I'm sure they would work with VITs as well. And the first GAN that really gave non-trivial results
was called DC-GAN that had this five layer ConvNet architecture, which gave what were at the time
pretty exciting samples. And I mentioned DC-GAN because the first author, Alec Radford et al, for most people doing DC-GAN would have been
a highlight of their career, but for Alec Radford, it wasn't nearly enough for him because the next project he worked on right after DC-GAN, does anybody know?
GPT. GPT. So Alec Radford, DC-GAN was kind of a low light in his career.
He went on to do GPT-1 and GPT-2, as well as some other amazing work at OpenAI.
So I think there's this really cool connection between people that were working on generative modeling of images actually jumped over to do generative modeling
of discrete text data, and did some of the really important work there. And one of the only other GAN paper
that I'm going to highlight is called StyleGAN. I'm not really going to walk you through the details of this one, other than to point you at it as a good one
to read if you want to know the best practices of GANs. They use a much more complicated architecture,
but they get pretty good results in practice. And one really nice thing about GANs is that they actually tend to learn something smooth
in the latent space. So what I mean by that is that if we have two latent vectors Z0 and Z1 and we interpolate between them,
that is draw a sample Z0 from your Gaussian, you draw a sample Z1 from your Gaussian.
Then you interpolate some kind of curve between Z0 and Z1. Then for every point along the curve we're going to generate a sample using our generator.
Then if we do that, we tend to get smooth interpolations through this latent space, which is something really cool with GANs.
And here's an example of this latent space interpolation from the StyleGAN3 paper.
So you can see that these are all generated samples by smoothly varying that latent z
and then passing it through the generator to generate these different samples. And you can see that these animals smoothly
morph into each other. So that means that the model has somehow uncovered some useful structure and stuffed it into the latent space.
So that's pretty cool. So I used to talk a lot more about generative adversarial
networks. The pros is basically they have a really fairly simple formulation. And if you tune them right, like we saw with StyleGAN3
then they can actually give you very nice results, very beautiful images, very high resolution, very good stuff.
But the cons like one like we talked about, they're fairly unstable to train. You have no loss curve to look at.
You have very unstable training. They tend to blow up at the drop of a hat so you end up with what's called mode collapse.
All of a sudden you might get NaNs. You might get infs. Your discriminator starts going crazy.
Your generator starts producing complete random garbage all the time. You have no loss curves to look at to diagnose this.
They're kind of a mess. So even though that GANs can give you really nice results if you very, very carefully tune them
and very, very carefully control the normalization, the sampling, everything about them, in practice
they've been fairly hard to scale up to really big models, to really big data. So GANs were basically the go to category
of generative models from around 2016 to maybe around 2020, 2021,
something around there. And in that five years, there were literally thousands and thousands of papers, people both trying
to use different GAN formulations, different loss functions, different mathematical formalisms, as well as applying GANs to all kinds of different generative
modeling tasks that you can imagine. So this was basically the go to generative modeling framework for about five or six years.
The question is would we just expect this? Shouldn't we just expect these smooth latents to pop out? I think not necessarily because one thing that
can happen with GANs is the generator might just memorize a fixed number of data samples.
So what if your generator ignores the latent z and just memorizes 10 samples from the training data set somehow?
And then no matter what z you give it, it always gives you one of those 10 samples from the training data set, and it never gives you anything else.
Then in that case, you're going to fool the discriminator because the generator is always giving you something which is maybe bit wise identical to one
of your real samples. And then in that case, the generator would have basically piled on Dirac delta
density in the immediate vicinity of a couple finite samples, but put no probability mass
anywhere else. So that actually is a legitimate solution for the generator. And that would definitely not give you smooth latents at all.
So that's just one example of how these things can collapse into unintuitive solutions that are not what you want.
Oh, good question. What is the relationship between your training data set and your latents? So this is actually something very fundamental
about GANs is a great question. So you can map one way. So the generator gives you a mapping from latent space into data space, maps from z to an x,
but with GANs you in general have no way to map back from an x to a z. And that's something very different between GANs and VAEs.
So VAEs will learn an explicit mapping from x to z, but with GANs you have no such thing. You can try to invert-- you can try
to compute an inverse numerically via gradient descent. And there's papers that do that, but there's actually
no explicitly enforced relationship between x and z. Instead, you can think of the discriminator
as trying to just enforce a distributional alignment between the distribution of all the outputs coming from the generator and the distribution of all the data
samples, without any kind of explicit supervision between them. Of course, when it comes to GANs, anything you probably think about,
there's probably at least a dozen papers about. So there's also a lot of papers about GAN variants that try to learn bidirectional mappings both ways,
but those never really took off. Oh, good question. What have we gained? So when we went to VAEs we gained latent vectors,
but we gave up density. And now with GANs it seems like we gave up latent vectors that we can control. What you gained was much better samples.
So when it comes to VAEs, VAEs tend not to give you very good samples. VAEs are characteristically always blurry.
They never really look good. VAEs on their own just never tend to give you very clean, crisp samples, but with GANs, as you
saw with some of the examples, you can get very crisp, very clean, very good samples,
but what you lost was your sanity in trying to tune these systems. Yeah, at inference time you throw away the discriminator
and just use the generator. So at inference you'll just draw a sample z from the prior, pass through the generator, get your sample from your data.
So it's very, very efficient at inference time. All right. So I mentioned that GANs used to be the go to category of generative modeling for about five
or six years. So what displaced them? And what displaced them was a very different category
of models called diffusion models. Now I need to put some caveats here. Diffusion model literature is crazy.
You read these papers, they go through five pages of math before they tell you at all what's going on. And there's three different mathematical formalisms
that lead to diffusion models that are all very different mathematically. And there's very different notation, very different
terminology, very different mathematical formalisms between papers. So this is a subarea that's crazy.
So I need to put a big caveat here that I'm not going to cover fully all the different variants
of diffusion models with all of their proper mathematical formalism. Instead, what I'm going to try to do is give you an intuitive overview of diffusion models,
as well as an intuitive geometric understanding of the most common form of diffusion models today, which are called rectified flow models.
And you could teach many, many lectures about diffusion models and get into all the interesting mathematical nuance of all these
flavors, but we just won't have time for that in 2/3 of one lecture, unfortunately.
So with that caveat aside, the intuition behind diffusion models is actually easy.
So with all generative models, we want to draw samples. And like GANs, we want to convert samples from a noise
distribution z into a data distribution, px, but the way that we're going to do that in diffusion models
is totally different. GANs learn this deterministic mapping through the generator to map a z directly to an x.
With a diffusion model, we're going to do something more implicit, more indirect. So what we're going to do, first off the first constraint
in diffusion models is that the z, the noise distribution, the noise always has to have the same shape as our data.
So if you have an image that's H by W by 3, then your noise distribution always has to be H by W by 3 as well.
They have to be exactly the same shape. Now what we're going to do is consider different versions
of our data that are corrupted by increasing levels of noise. So here, if we have a data sample, which
is this picture of a cat, then t is going to be our noise level, which ranges from 0 to 1.
So at t equals 0 that means no noise. That means a totally clean data sample. t equals 0.3 is a little bit of noise.
We add some of our noise z into-- we mix some of our noise, z, into our data, x.
And if we go all the way to t equals 1, we get full noise. And those are going to be samples directly from our noise distribution.
So somehow this t parameter is going to interpolate smoothly between our data distribution and our noise distribution.
And this is something that we can-- and the noise distribution again is going to be almost always Gaussian, Something simple
that we understand and can sample from. And now what we're going to do is train a neural network
to do a little bit of incremental denoising. So the neural network is going to receive some sample, which
is a piece of data which has been corrupted with some intermediate amount of noise. And now the neural network is going to be trained to try to clean it up a little bit,
remove just a little bit of noise. So the training objective here is going to be neural network inputs, an image of some amount
with some amount of noise and it tries to remove some of the noise. Then at inference time what we're going to do
is do an iterative procedure where we first draw a noise sample directly from our noise distribution, pz,
and then iteratively apply the neural network to remove noise from that sample one at a time.
So the very first time we do this, we're going to draw a complete sample that's complete noise.
And then the very first application of the neural network, the network will be trying to remove noise from full noise.
So it will basically be forced to hallucinate just a tiny whiff of data structure in that noise.
And then once we get to some slightly less noisy example, we're going to pass it back to the neural network
and again ask it to remove just a little bit of noise from this now slightly denoised, slightly generated image.
And then it'll get a little bit less noisy and it'll get a little bit less noisy, and it'll get a little bit less noisy.
And eventually, if we set up all of this stuff correctly, then we want to get to a situation where we can draw a complete noise sample
and then ask the network to remove noise from that complete sample z of complete random noise
until eventually, we've removed all the noise and come up with a generated sample from the system.
So that's a weird setting. It's a weird thing, but that's the intuition behind diffusion models.
Is the number of steps a fixed hyperparameter? It depends. So on this slide, I've intentionally been--
I was forced to be very vague about all these things. What is the noise? What does it mean to corrupt the data with respect to the noise?
What does it mean to remove a little bit of the noise? What does it mean to apply it iteratively at inference?
Because, like I said, there's so many different formalisms of diffusion, there's a lot of different variants about exactly what these mean in different situations.
So this slide is intended to be a fairly high level overview of diffusion. And then different specific implementations
of diffusion models will have different concrete choices for what all these terms specifically mean.
So does this high level picture of diffusion make sense? OK, so then let's make this more concrete.
So now we're going to jump from general diffusion models to a particular category of diffusion models called
rectified flow models. Some people may argue with me and say that rectified flow is not diffusion.
Some people might say that they're different things. I don't really care. To me, rectified flow is a kind of diffusion model.
Fight me. So with rectified flow, the intuition is basically this. We have the same thing.
We have our pnoise. We have our pdata. And we're going to draw this geometrically because I think that's a nice way to gain intuition.
Geometrically in two dimensions in particular because that's all that fits on the slide, but of course, these are going to be super, super high dimensional images
and Gaussians, which is an easy way to get led astray because you know that intuitions that hold in two and three dimensions go totally out the window
when you go to a lot of dimensions. It's really sad. It's sad that we live in such a low dimensional universe
because our intuitions that we build in this universe just don't really transfer to 100 dimensional spaces,
1,000 dimensional spaces. So always be aware, but it is what it is. We're stuck with the universe we got.
So the setup in rectified flow is that we've got our distribution pnoise, our distribution pdata.
pnoise is something simple that we understand we can sample from, we can compute integrals of. It's a very friendly distribution. pdata again,
is something crazy. That's what the universe is using to give us images. Now at every training iteration, we're
going to sample a z from our prior distribution and sample an x from our data distribution.
We can draw a sample analytically because pz is something simple that we control. And drawing a sample from the data distribution
just means picking an example from your finite training set. Now and you're also going to choose a t
to be uniform on 0 to 1. Remember t is our noise level, where t equals 0 means no noise,
t equals 1 means all the noise. So now we're going to draw a line that points from our data sample x directly to our noise sample
z. And this line, this vector pointing from x to z, we're going to call it v. This is going to be
the velocity of a flow field. And then we set xt to be a point along this line, which
is a linear interpolation between x and z. So now we've got our noise sample z, our data sample x, we've got the velocity
vector between them, v, and we've picked a noise version of our data xt.
And in the previous slide when we said get noisy data, this is what that means in the case of rectified flow models.
It's a linear interpolation between a data sample and a noise sample. And now the training objective is very, very simple.
So now we're going to train a neural network f theta, so that's f with learnable parameters theta. That neural network is going to input the noisy sample xt as
well as the noise level t. And it's going to try to predict the green vector v. So that's it.
That's all we need to do in rectified flow. The code for this is very simple. You would be shocked how much obscurity there
is when you read papers here. And it boils down to this very simple code. Drives me crazy that this is not made more clear in a lot of presentations of this.
So then the training loop for rectified flow is extremely simple. You loop over your data set at every iteration.
You get z, which is unit Gaussian of the same shape as x.
You choose a noise level t, which is uniform 0 to 1. You compute xt, which is a linear interpolation between x
and z. You give xt and t to your model and then your loss is just the mean squared error
between this ground truth v and the model prediction. And that's it. That's your training objective for rectified flow models.
Contrast this with GANs. When you train rectified flow models or really any kind of diffusion model, you have
a loss that you can look at during training. When the loss goes down, the model is generally better. So for those of us that went through half a decade of GAN
madness, the first time you train a diffusion model and there's a loss to look at, it's like, oh my god,
this is an amazing thing. How many hours have we spent looking at GAN plots and they look like this? And you have no idea.
It's like reading tea leaves to tell whether or not the model is working well. You train a diffusion model, you get this beautiful, smooth exponential loss curve
and it just makes you so happy, so that's great. So then that's training for that's
training for diffusion models. Now what do we do at inference because the GANs are
kind of easy at inference? GANs, you just have to take a z, pass it through your generator. You get a data sample. Very straightforward, but now with diffusion model
or rectified flow model in this case, the model output itself is useless.
We get this xt. We get a v. What are we going to do with this? Not super clear. So then at inference time is where
diffusion models get a little bit more complicated compared to GANs. So at inference we first will upfront
choose a number of steps, t, which is usually a fixed constant. And in the case of rectified flow models,
t equals 50 is usually a good number to start with. Sometimes you can get down to t equals 30 and that works OK.
Then what you're going to do is sample an x directly from your noise distribution. This is going to be pure noise that's sampled from your known
noise distribution. Then you're going to evaluate the-- then you're going to loop from t equals 1.
You're going to march backwards to t equals 0. This is your noise level. And in this case in this simple version we're just marching linearly from full noise 1 back
to noise 0 perfectly clean. Then at the first iteration we're going to take our xt that was at first full noise,
pass it to the network along with the current noise level and get the network's predicted vt. And remember what this vt is supposed to be
in the case of rectified flow. This v, remember, was supposed to point from a data sample
all the way to a noise sample. So then it's geometrically obvious what you should do in the case of rectified flow.
You should take a little step along that predicted v vector because the problem is, this rectified flow
model, that v is not going to point you all the way to a clean sample. It's just going to get you started. It's going to set you on a trajectory
towards a clean sample. So we take a little step along that predicted v from the flow model to get a new x2, which is now a version of the data that
has had a little bit of the noise removed from it by the model. And now we iterate this. So once we have this x two thirds,
then we pass it back to the model and get another predicted v vector from the model. And remember the v is supposed to point from a clean sample
all the way to a noise sample. So then again, we can take a gradient step, take a little step along this predicted v
to get another x one third. Repeat this thing again. Evaluate the model again to get another predicted v
and then take a step in this case all the way to no noise all the way to the end of that vector to get our predicted x0.
And then that is our sample from our diffusion model. So then the inference procedure you
see here got a little bit more complicated compared to GANs, but what we gained here was sanity.
When you're training you've regained that and they tend to give you much better samples and they tend to scale really well to large data
sets and large models. And the code here is really simple. So we start off by taking a random sample,
make it be perfectly random, then march backwards for t from 1 back to 0.
At every noise level, you get a predicted v from the model, given your current sample as well as your T. Then you take what looks like a gradient descent
step on the model's predicted v and update the sample and just repeat this whole thing in a loop.
So then you can see these diffusion models aren't so scary after all. You can actually fit a complete implementation
of training and sampling from a rectified flow model in just a couple lines on one slide,
which I think is very nice. OK, so you might be asked-- so this is pretty nice.
I'm pretty happy that we're able to get to a full-- and this will actually work. If you take this code, you plug it in,
you plug it in a reasonable model architecture, this will actually work. This will actually convert to something
reasonable in a lot of cases. You're hitting on the core problem in generative modeling that I've been thinking about a lot the last couple of days
while reviewing these slides. The core problem in generative modeling is somehow you have a prior distribution, which
is z's that you know how to sample from. You have a data distribution, which is x's that you want to generate. And the core problem in generative modeling
is figuring out how to associate z's and x's and all your different categories to generative modeling do it in different ways.
In a VAE, you say I'm going to have the model predict a z and then predict an x and then try to force that z
to be something I know how to sample from, which doesn't super work that well. In a GAN you're not supervising that relationship.
The generator is kind of figuring out its own mapping from z to x in a feedforward way through this distribution matching objective
that the discriminator is giving it. In diffusion, it's figuring out by--
it ends up having to integrate these curves. And there's actually several different mathematical
formalisms as to why objectives that look like this end up matching probability distributions in a reasonable way.
But again, the whole core problem is that we have no way ahead of time to pair up samples z from our prior with samples
x from our data. If we knew how to make that pairing and also knew how to sample from the prior, you'd be done.
And in some sense, all these different forms of generative modeling are different ways to square that circle and come up
with a way to learn an association from z to x and be able to sample from z even
though we don't have that association at training time. There's a lot of different interpretations of this that can get very, very heavy, very quick
so I've tried to avoid them. But we said last lecture that unconditional generative
modeling is pointless, so what we almost always care about is conditional generative modeling.
And that's easy to accommodate in rectified flow. So to do conditional rectified flow, we imagine that there's different subparts of our data
distribution. Here I'm saying it's categorical. Maybe our data is actually squares and triangles. And then we have our whole data distribution pdata as well as
our two subdistributions, pdata x given that y is a square and pdata x given that the label y is a triangle.
So this is the picture you should have in mind when you think about conditional generative modeling. Then in the case of rectified flow
this is very easy to accommodate. So your data set now has pairs x and y and your model now takes y as an additional auxiliary input
somehow. And then during sampling same thing. You get your predicted V's.
The model takes as input this extra y and you use that. So this all goes through.
The difference is that now y is actually hopefully some conditional signal that the user can control.
Maybe this is a text prompt. Maybe this is an input image. Maybe this is some kind of user input that you're expecting at inference time, which
actually make these models controllable and useful in practice. But then there's another really interesting question.
Is there any knob you can tune to control how much the model pays attention to the conditioning
signal? It turns out if you train these things naively, a lot of times they don't often follow the conditioning
signal quite as much as you would like. So there's a trick called classifier free guidance or CFG that changes our diffusion training
loop just a little bit. So what we're going to do is we're still going to train this conditional diffusion model that inputs your xt, inputs your y, but on every training iteration,
we're going to flip a coin. And if that coin is heads we're going to delete the conditioning information. So we're going to set it equal to some kind of 0
value or null value, basically destroy the conditioning information 50% of the time. That could be a hyperparameter, but 50 is a pretty good one
that most people use in practice. So we're going to flip a coin. If the coin is heads, delete the conditioning information.
So that means that the model is conceptually now forced to learn two different kinds of velocity vectors.
So then the model is forced to learn two different kinds
of velocity vectors. So in the case where we pass it this null value for y that
has destroyed the conditioning information, then this is basically an unconditional generative model now.
Now that predicted velocity vector, v, has to point back towards the meat of the whole data distribution pdata,
but when we pass a real conditioning input y that's not destroyed, non-null, non-zero,
then we're getting a conditional velocity vector that is pointing us back towards not the full data distribution,
but towards the conditional data distribution, which is conditional on that conditioning signal that we cared about.
And then the dumb trick is we're going to take a linear combination of these two vectors to push it more towards the conditional velocity vector.
So in particular we'll have a scalar hyperparameter w and take a linear combination 1 plus times vy minus w times v null.
So that's going to be a vector that now points even more towards the conditional distribution
than it does the data distribution. And then the idea is that during sampling we're now going to--
then during sampling, we're now going to step according to this v CFG vector rather
than the raw vectors predicted by the model. And then setting w equals 1--
setting w equals 0 here, we'll recover exactly the conditional 1. And the higher your w is then the more
you're overemphasizing the conditioning signal. And then this is pretty easy to implement.
So then your inference code doesn't really change too much, but now you evaluate the model twice at every iteration
to get your vy and your v0. And then you take this linear combination and then step according to that.
And this is called classifier free because of a stupid reason. There was an earlier paper called classifier guidance
that I don't want to get into. And then they removed the classifier. And even though there was only nine months between those two
papers and it's now been four years since the second one, we're still stuck with the name classifier free guidance.
So it is what it is. OK, so that's actually really important in practice for getting high quality outputs and that's CFG.
That's really important. That's used everywhere in diffusion models. It does double the cost of sampling though because now you need to hit the model twice on every iteration, which
is a problem. There's this thing on optimal prediction. I think I'll skip that. That's not so interesting.
It is interesting, but I'm worried about time. But one thing that we sometimes need to do
is tweak this t distribution. So we saw in particular that we were sampling t
according to a uniform distribution in a raw rectified flow model. And the thing about that is that is
going to put uniform emphasis on all noise levels. And intuitively, when you're at full noise,
the problem is very easy. When you're at full noise, the problem is very easy.
Then the optimal prediction from the model is basically to point towards the mean of the data distribution.
And similarly, when you're at 0 noise then the optimal prediction is actually to point towards the mean of the noise distribution.
So actually the optimal prediction from the model at full noise and full data and no noise
are actually very relatively easy problems. It just needs to learn the mean of those two distributions. But when you're somewhere in the middle,
it's actually really hard because when you're somewhere in the middle and you sample that xt, there might have been multiple pairs x
and z that could have given rise to that same xt in the middle. And then the network basically needs
to solve this expectation problem and figure out what is that optimal direction to predict that integrates over all possible x's and z's that
might intersect at this point xt. So somehow those points in the middle are intuitively much harder for the network to solve, but when we sample uniformly
from 0 to 1t, then we're putting equal importance on all levels of noise, which doesn't really match this intuition.
So in practice you'll often sample from different noise schedules. And one very popular one is this one called logit-normal sampling, which basically
looks like a Gaussian, puts relatively little weight on the 0 and the 1 with a lot more weight in the middle.
Another thing you'll see sometimes are these so-called shifted noise schedules that are asymmetric that shift more towards one
direction or the other. And those are important as we scale to high resolution data. The intuition being that when you have a very high resolution
image, then there can be very strong correlations across neighboring pixels. When you have a low resolution image,
then the correlations across neighboring pixels tend to be smaller. So depending on how strong of correlations
you have in your data, you actually may need different amounts of noise level to properly destroy information in a nice way.
So these things don't naively scale to different resolutions. And that's actually a big problem with these diffusion
models is that they're a beautiful formulation, but they're hard to get them to work naively
on high resolution data. So that leads to actually-- I said diffusion models are the most popular form
of generative modeling. That was a little bit of a lie, because what's actually most popular are these so-called latent diffusion
models, which is a variant that actually gets used everywhere. So here it's going to be a multi-stage procedure.
So what we're going to do is first train an encoder network and a decoder network. The encoder network is going to map from our image
into some latent space, which I've colored in purple. And ideally that latent is going to spatially downsample
the image by a factor of D, as well as convert from three channels up into C channels.
And a pretty common setting is to get 8 by 8 spatial downsampling and to increase to 16 channels.
That's some of these most common encoder decoders. These encoder decoders tend to be CNNs with attention,
but some more recent papers have explored VITs for these. Then what we do is we're going to train a diffusion model not
on the raw pixel space of our images, but instead on the latent space, which is discovered by this encoder decoder model.
So then the training procedure looks for training the diffusion model, we're going to sample an image,
pass it through the encoder that we learned in the first stage to get a latent and then add noise to the latent
and train the diffusion model to denoise the noise latent. And really importantly, you freeze the encoder
so you do not propagate the gradients back into the encoder. We're only using it to extract these latents
and then training a diffusion model directly on the latent space, which is learned by the encoder. Then at inference time, once you're all done training,
then we'll sample a random latent pass it through the diffusion model many, many times to remove all the noise to get a clean sample,
but that clean sample is now a clean sample in latent space. So then we need to run the decoder to convert that clean latent into a clean image.
And this is actually the most common form of most diffusion models these days. So you might be asking OK we've knocked this diffusion
model, this encoder decoder. How do we train an encoder decoder? Any ideas?
Have we seen encoder decoders? How about a variational autoencoder? So in practice whenever you're training these latent diffusion
models, this encoder decoder tends to be a variational autoencoder, but we just
said there was a big problem with variational autoencoders is that they give you blurry outputs. And if this encoder decoder is going
to give you blurry outputs, the quality of the reconstructions you get out of the decoder is going to bottleneck the quality of the generations you get out
of the downstream diffusion model. So if your encoder decoder is giving you blurry, ugly reconstructions, that's not going to fly.
That's not going to get us good clean samples. So anyone have an idea for cleaning up the sample quality of a VAE?
But something after the decoder in particular, we can make it a GAN.
So what we tend to do is actually train this encoder that encodes from an image
into latent space, a decoder that goes from latent space back to image, a discriminator that tries to tell the fake images from the real images,
and then a diffusion model that generates these things in latent space. So this is basically why we have to walk through all
of these different formulations of generative models in order for you to understand the modern pipeline.
Basically the state of the art in generative modeling is is it a VAE? Is it a GAN? Is it a diffusion?
It's all of them. It's all of them. The modern generative modeling pipeline involves training a VAE and a GAN and a diffusion model.
I'm sorry. It's a mess. OK, so then you might ask, what do the neural networks actually
look like under the hood here? So thankfully there is some sanity here the last couple of years.
It turns out that relatively straightforward transformers actually can be applied to these diffusion models and they work really well.
These are typically called diffusion transformers or DiTs, but basically these are just standard diffusion models
or standard transformer blocks that really don't really have much special sauce in them. There's a couple of questions.
The main question you need to solve in the architectural side is how do you inject the conditioning information?
And in particular, the diffusion model now needs to take three things as input. It needs to take your noisy image, it
needs to take your timestamp t. It also needs to take your conditioning signal, which it might be your text or something like that.
And then you have a couple different mechanisms for injecting that conditioning signal into your transformer blocks.
So the first is to predict a scale and shift that are going to be used to modulate some of the intermediate activations of your diffusion block.
And that's typically the way that we inject the timestamp information into diffusion models. Another thing you can do is transformers
are just models of sequences so you can jam everything into the sequence. You can jam the timestamp into the sequence.
You can jam your text into the sequence. You can jam whatever you want into the sequence and have the transformer just model that sequence of data
all together. And you can do that either via cross-attention or joint attention and different models do both.
And typically in modern diffusion DiTs we inject the timestamp through this scale shift
mechanism. And you inject the text or other conditioning signal through sequence concatenation usually cross-attention,
but sometimes joint attention as well. So then how can you actually apply this to different problems?
So one task that people care about a lot is the task of text to image generation. So here we're going to input a text prompt.
This is one that I wrote yesterday. A professional documentary photograph of a monkey shaking hands with a tiger in front of the Eiffel Tower.
The monkey is wearing a hat made out of bananas. Tiger is standing on two legs and wearing a suit. And this is a real sample.
It's crazy that this stuff works now, but I'm sure you've all seen these kind of things before. And the way that this works is you'll
take your text prompt, pass it through usually a pre-trained text encoder. So actually I lied.
There's actually more models you have to train. In addition to an encoder and a decoder and a VAE and a discriminator, you also
need to train a language model secretly to get these things to work. So you'll actually typically pick up a pre-trained text
encoder, usually T5 clip, something like that to give text embeddings. And usually the text encoder will be frozen.
Then those text embeddings you pass your text embeddings together with your noisy latents into your diffusion transformer
that also gets your diffusion time step that's going to output clean latents. And this thing will go iteratively.
And that'll go through your VAE decoder to give you your final image. And just to put some numbers on this to make it concrete,
one pretty powerful open source model right now is called FLUX1 dev. They use the T5 and clip encoders.
Their encoder uses 8x downsampling. They train a 12 billion parameter transformer model on this and that transformer
has an additional layer of downsampling on top of the VAE, which is kind of messy. So it ends up having a sequence length of 1,024 image tokens.
Another task that people care about a lot is text to video. So we can input a text prompt and then output the pixels of a video that follow that text prompt.
And the pipeline basically looks the same. So you're going to input a text through your pre-trained text
encoder, get noisy latents. Importantly, the only difference is that your latents now have an extra dimension to accommodate the time.
So in addition to two spatial dimensions hw, you'll also have a time dimension in your latent and that will give you clean latents.
And then your decoder, this is typically going to be a spatial temporal autoencoder now. So it will downsample both spatially and temporally.
So then it will take your latents and then upsample them into pixels, which will give you a video.
And this is actually a generated video from Meta's GOOVIGEN paper that came out last year.
And that's putting some particular numbers
on this thing. And the key takeaway of these video generation models is that they get very expensive to train due to the sequence
length, because if you want to generate high FPS, high resolution, high frame rate video,
it just ends up with a lot of tokens. So we said that with a fairly state of the art text to image
diffusion model, that transformer ended up working on a sequence of 1,024 image tokens.
For this text to video diffusion model, even though the overall architecture looks pretty similar, the biggest difference
is in the sequence length. Now they actually need to process 76,000 video tokens
to process this, to create this high resolution video with a lot of frames. So that's where the expense happens in these video diffusion models is actually processing
these really long sequences. So I think basically the last year
has pretty much been the era of video diffusion models. So it basically seems like every week almost for the past year,
there's been a new interesting video diffusion model coming out. And these have been a mix of open source models, models
that have technical reports. So they give you some details about the model architecture and the training and purely industrial models
where they don't tell you anything, but they'll take your credit card number and let you generate samples from it. So I'm not going to go through all of these one by one,
but I just wanted to give the sense of this has been a really hot topic really the past 18 months.
And in particular there was this really influential blog post from OpenAI called Sora that came out
in March 2024, which was not the first diffusion model on videos, but it was the first one that gave really, really, really good
results. And they adopted this modern diffusion transformer plus rectified flow.
Actually, I don't know if they were using rectified flow in Sora. I don't know if they said, but they were one of the first
to really scale up these diffusion transformers and get this thing to work really well. And then that was the four minute mile moment
in video diffusion models. And then all the other big companies took notice of that and quickly tried to replicate Sora.
So I said it's felt like for the past year and a half that almost every week, there's been a brand new, state of the art video diffusion model.
And today is no exception because an hour and a half-- at 11:00 AM this morning, Google announced Veo 3,
which is almost certainly the best generative model of video out there right now. I literally read the blog post while I
was in the car on the way here, but it seems cool. Here's some samples from V3.
So these are actually generated videos from a text prompt in Google's new model, kind of crazy.
Also this model also models sound jointly so they can output audio along with the video frames.
This is another generated one, so you can tell what you want to happen in text. It'll fly over here and looks crazy.
OK, so I thought that's just fun to incorporate new stuff. OK, so one big problem with diffusion
is that during sampling it's really slow. We said that sampling was this iterative procedure. And these models can be really big.
These can be models with tens of billions of parameters potentially operating on sequence lengths of tens of thousands or more.
So these things get really slow at inference time because even with rectified flow, you need like tens of iterations of the model at inference time.
So the solution is a category of algorithms called distillation, which we don't have time to get into. I just wanted to put a couple of references here,
make you aware that this exists as a set of techniques. So distillation algorithms are basically ways that you can take a diffusion model that normally
would take 30, 50, 100 iterations at inference time to get good samples and then modify the model in some way
such that you can take many, many fewer steps on inference and still get good samples. They tend to sacrifice sample quality.
So the whole trick in distillation methods is trying to maintain the sample quality as good as you can, while still letting you take fewer
samples at inference time. And some distillation methods let you get all the way down to single step sampling, which is really cool,
although they tend to take quite a hit on the generation quality when you do that.
I'm not going to go through these, but I just put some references here to different papers on distillation if you want to take a look.
And this is a really active and evolving area of research. So if you look at these references, these are from 2024, from 2025.
So these are stuff that people are working on right now is how do we get better distillation, how do we get diffusion models to be more
efficient at inference time? So another thing. So I mentioned that diffusion has this black hole of math
that you can get sucked into. And we intentionally sidestepped that by just walking very intuitively through rectified flow models,
giving you a geometric intuition for the problem without really diving through any math that proves anything.
So I wanted to give you just a brief sense of what some of these formalisms are, but we're not going to be able to go through them in detail.
So here's restating the rectified flow objective. We said that during training we're going to sample our x's and our z's according
to our data distribution and our noise distribution. We're going two sample t according to some distribution pt that we choose either on uniform, logit-normal
or shifted, something like that. And then we'll set xt equal to the linear interpolation between x and z. We'll set our-- now we've written this a little bit
differently in this slide. Now we're writing down a ground truth velocity vgt that we want the network to predict which is z minus x.
We compute a predicted v from the network by passing our noisy xt and our t, then compute an L2 loss, minimizing
the vgt and the predicted v from the network.
When I said that there's a lot of different formalisms, a lot of different flavors of diffusion, what a lot of these look to is different functional hyperparameters
in this general setup. So in more generalized flavors of diffusion usually
you might vary what is this pt distribution. Usually you don't vary the noise distribution. This is almost always Gaussian, at least for continuous models,
but what you will vary is how do you compute that noisy xt. And in general that will be some functional combination-- that
will be some linear combination of x and z. And the linear combination weights will in general
be some function of t, but what exactly that function is depends on the diffusion formulation. Then what also varies is what is that ground truth target that we
ask the model to predict. It's always going to be some linear combination of our data sample x and our latent z.
And again, what are the linear combination weights might be functions of t in some formulations.
So basically and then we're going to ask the model to-- we're going to give it that noisy xt and the t, get a predicted y.
And then always compute an L2 loss between the two. I mean, not always, but usually. And then what varies is basically
what are these different functional forms. What are these different functions that we plot, that we slot into these four different spots in this thing?
So in the case of rectified flow it's fairly simple. These all take these really simple forms.
And ct and dt are actually just constants. There's another flavor of this called variance preserving where
you collapse these two into one scalar hyperparameter called sigma of t. And now you have these linear combinations
in this particular way. And you choose this because if x and z are independent and have unit variance, then your output also
is guaranteed to have unit variance. So that collapses these two functional hyperparameters into just one noise schedule and then
you still need to choose that somehow. In combination with variance preserving, there's also variance exploding is
another one where you'll set at equals 1, bt equal to again some sigma of t. And then you need to choose that somehow.
There's a lot of different targets that people will choose. Sometimes they'll ask the network
to predict the clean data. Sometimes they'll ask the model to predict the noise that was added. Sometimes they'll ask the network
to predict some linear combination of the two. And in the case of rectified flow, you are just predicting that velocity vector that
points from a data directly to a noise, but in more in different flavors of diffusion, all of these
can change. Then you might be wondering choosing hyperparameters is bad enough.
Now we need to choose hyperparameters, which are themselves functions of t. This is crazy. You're never going to set these intuitively,
so you have to be guided by some kind of math. And there's basically three different mathematical formalisms that people think about when
training diffusion models that again, we will not walk through in practice. I just want to get you to know the existence of.
The first is that diffusion is a latent variable model. We have our clean data samples x0,
but then associated to every clean data sample there exists some sequence of corrupted or noisy samples that correspond
to that clean sample. And we can't observe them. We don't know what they are, but we need to figure them out somehow. So that's a latent variable model.
That ends up looking a lot like a variational autoencoder. Remember, in a variational autoencoder we had a z and an x.
We didn't observe the z. We wanted to train this thing somehow. Then it turns out you can use a very similar mathematical trick
as we did in variational autoencoders and maximize some variational lower bound of the likelihood of the data. And that gives rise to this latent variable model
interpretation of diffusion. A totally different interpretation of diffusion
is that it models something called the score function. So given a distribution pdata of x,
there's this nice thing called the score function of the distribution, which is the derivative with respect to x of the log of pdata of x.
And intuitively given a distribution, the score function is a vector field that points towards areas of high probability density.
So for any point in the data space, the score function is going to be a vector that points you towards areas of high data density.
And now another interpretation of diffusion is that diffusion is learning the score function of the data distribution and in fact, learning
a set of score functions corresponding to different levels of noise on the data distribution.
So there's another interpretation of diffusion, which is that it's trying to learn a family of score functions corresponding
to a family of noise distributions that corrupt the true data distribution with increasing amounts of known noise.
And that's a totally different mathematical formalism that gives rise to very similar looking algorithm at the end.
And then the third one that's come onto the scene a little bit more recently is this notion of diffusion as solving stochastic differential equations.
And I got to admit I don't fully understand this one myself, so don't ask me too many questions, but the idea
is that you want to write down some differential equation that's going to write down some infinitesimal way
to transport samples from a noise distribution into samples from a data distribution. And then inference, then the neural network
is basically learning some kind of numeric integrator, some numeric integrator to this stochastic differential equation
that we can write down. And this opens up a whole new way of thinking about it because from under the lens of stochastic differential
equations, then we get access to two whole different categories
of methods to sample from these things at inference time. And from this perspective, the naive gradient descent type
approach that we saw in rectified flow basically corresponds to a forward Euler type of integrator on top of a stochastic differential equation.
And then under this interpretation, you can imagine doing all kinds of more complicated integrators to maybe do a better job at marching along this score
function. So again, these are deep waters. There's papers that go into great detail on all
these things. And a blog post that I really like is this one by Sander Dielman on perspectives on diffusion,
who actually gave eight different perspectives on different ways to think about or view diffusion models. So this is an excellent post.
I would highly recommend. I would actually highly recommend everything he's written about diffusion models. All his blog posts are amazing.
Autoregressive models actually come back. We can do the same thing, encoder-decoder
and put an autoregressive model on there too. So just sneaking this in there at the end,
in addition to diffusion models, the other modern recipe for generative modeling is to train an autoregressive model
on discrete latents that are computed by a discrete variational autoencoder. So that's why we did for generative models that we did,
GANs, VAEs, autoregressive models diffusion because it turns out they all get used in modern machine
learning pipelines. So that's basically the summary of today. Today we did a whirlwind tour of two different categories
of generative models. We talked about generative adversarial networks as well as diffusion models. And we saw their modern full pipeline instantiated
in latent diffusion models, which is of a nice way to wrap up this generative modeling section, because all the generative models that we saw basically
come back and come together to form these big modern pipelines. So thanks and next time, we'll talk about vision and language.

I'm really happy to announce our next guest speaker for the course, Professor Jiajun Wu.
So Jiajun is an assistant professor here at Stanford in the Department of Computer Science,
and he's a faculty member of the Stanford Vision and Learning
Lab. His research focuses on scene understanding with an emphasis on multimodal perception, robotics and embodied AI,
visual generation and reasoning, and 3D understanding, which is the topic of today's lecture.
And so I'll now turn it over to Jiajun to begin today's lecture. OK, yeah, so I'm Jiajun.
I'm an assistant professor here. And I think, a few years ago, I used to teach this class, co-teach.
So I heard this year, it's the 10th year anniversary. So you have guest speakers from different places.
OK, so today, we're going to talk about 3D vision. So it might be kind of different from a lot of things
you learned before because, I think, in the past few weeks, we talked about convolution neural networks
and transformers and maybe vision language models and generative models as well for Justin. Right, OK.
Yeah, so here, for 3D, I think I'm going to first introduce a little bit on, what are the 3D representations?
So it's more like, it's pretty distant from all the deep learning stuff. But then we're going to talk about how deep learning or AI
has changed 3D vision and how they can be integrated in different ways. And we're looking into a few different applications about 3D
generation, reconstruction, and stuff like that. OK, so let's begin by looking into, what are the possible ways
to represent objects in 3D? Because in 2D, it's so straightforward. It looks like I just have pixels.
I have a loading a file of a PNG file or a JPEG file. It's like 200 by 200 pixels.
But how can we represent 3D objects? I think that's the first thing we want to look into. And 3D objects, they can be diverse.
They can be at different scales. It can be huge, large buildings and trees, complex structures.
And if you zoom in, you can also see all the fine details. So what are the best 3D representations to represent all
these different types of 3D objects at different scales with different features?
And unlike images, where everyone just uses pixels, so we have 200 by 200, 500 by 500.
The way to represent 3D objects, objects are also like, you have geometry. You have textures.
You have materials. But let's just maybe start by looking at geometry. And even just for 3D object geometry,
there are so many different ways to represent them. We can basically categorize them into two different categories.
One is called explicit representations. So where you can, in some sense, directly, I
would say, explicitly representing part of the objects. This includes things like point clouds,
if you have a cloud of 3D points, or a polygon mesh or subdivisions,
which we're going to talk about it, and others. And there's a different categories of object shape representations, which are often called implicit.
So we're going to talk about them as well. So I'm going to explain them a little bit of detail later, including level sets, algebraic surfaces, distance
functions. So they are basically representing 3D objects or their geometries as functions, which it is not directly-- it's not as, in some sense,
intuitive as, oh, it's just a collection of points. But as we'll see later, they also have their own advantages and weaknesses
using implicit representations. So every choice, they have their suitable task and type of geometry.
And in particular, in the context of deep learning, they may also have their own strengths and weaknesses when you want to apply deep learning methods on top of it.
So when do we choose a representation? We have to store them, so pixels are
easy to store because it's just a matrix. But then 3D point clouds are more irregular.
And also, especially if you use some implicit representations, like representing object as a function, how would you store that in a computer?
And how does it support creating new shapes? And especially now, let's say, maybe the input is a picture,
or the input is a language description. And different type of operations-- you have 3D objects.
And then how can you edit it, simplify it, smooth it, filter, and repair it? So you can have to do a lot more.
For images, sometimes you want to do that, too. You want to edit it. You want to edit it using language. You want to edit it using stroke.
And how can you edit or perform any type of operations on 3D objects and rendering?
How can you turn that 3D objects into 2D pixels? In some sense, you can. 3D vision is to invert the process.
How can you go from 2D images to reconstruct the 3D objects? So how they support all these different things,
including in animations, especially if you are modeling, let's say, 3D humans or animals, and you want to animate them,
so all these factors need to be considered. And something else, of course, that connects through all these
is also their integration with different deep learning methods for, let's say, shape editing, rendering, inverse rendering,
and animation as well. So very quickly, I can go through some of these representations like point clouds.
So point cloud is probably the simplest representations. I only have 3D points.
It doesn't have connectivity, so it doesn't capture how these points are connected. So you basically just have a-- instead
of having an n by [? n ?] matrix, which is about the pixel values of all the pixels in the picture, now you have a 3 by n matrix,
where 3 is x, y, z coordinates of these individual points. And you have a number of points.
So sometimes, you can represent the surface normals of the point as well so that you have not only where the point is
in the 3D space, but also to which direction it's facing. So you have the surface normals, which give you
a bit more information. And sometimes, people call them surfels, which is points with orientations.
And yeah, so why do you need surface normals? Because if you want to render them, you want to say how the object look like,
then that means you have to often specify a lighting source. Where's the lighting coming from? But to make the rendering look realistic,
you have to consider how the lighting, coming from a certain direction, is going to interact with the point.
And this is where the surface normals is used to help you to make the rendering look realistic, like you can see here.
So how can you get points? A benefit of the point cloud, it is often a raw format that you
will get from a lot of the 3D sensors, including these depth sensors, including some 3D scanners.
And nowadays, I think if you can even use an iPhone. I think they have an AR kit, or these kind of software allow you
to scan 3D objects. But the raw output of those sensors, they're still 3D point clouds.
Now, of course, after that, you have to process them and fuse them to make it like maybe objects with textures.
So yeah, they often results from scanners. They can potentially be very noisy. And there are things like this, and you
want to fuse them, merge them, repair them. And in this part, you have to consider
how these different pictures can be registered to give you the shared point cloud.
And they're very flexible, so you can-- because you can move points here and there.
So you can use them to represent basically any type of object geometry. You're not constrained by the topology or stuff like that.
It's useful for large data sets because sometimes, you have to consider a very diverse set of objects.
But because the points are already, in some sense-- you consider they being presampled.
So if you have a lot of points-- if you're representing objects, but your points are sampled in an even way in the sense
that you have a lot of points, let's say, on the head of the rabbit, but you have very, very few points on the tail of the rabbit, then it
will be actually hard to draw samples from these undersampled regions. So sometimes, when people consider sampling points,
you have to design algorithm to make sure you sample them roughly evenly, across different parts of the objects.
And other limitations, or it's not obvious how we can directly perform sometimes the very useful operations, like simplification or subdivisions,
on these objects. It doesn't directly allow you to do smooth rendering.
There's no topological information. So for example here, if I give you a collection of points,
then you can't even tell if this is like a torus or this is like these ring-like shapes, because it doesn't tell you
how these points are connected. So it's a partial information about what the object is if you
just have the point clouds. So naturally, people will say, OK, how can I actually capture more information
so that I can distinguish between these two different objects? Then naturally, that goes to the polygonal meshes.
So it represents the objects still as a collection of points, but then also how these points are connected.
So now you have not only the points, but also the faces, the surfaces. And this is arguably, I would say,
the most widely used representation for 3D objects in all these graphics engines and in computer games and stuff
like that, basically it is all represented as polygon meshes. But you can see that to represent faces,
it is more complex because often, you have to consider-- especially if you're looking at raw meshes,
then every face may have a different number of points. You may have three points and have four points or five points. And how you can represent them, especially given
their irregularity, how you can integrate them with neural networks, especially in the early stage when people start with convolution neural networks,
they always assume a fixed resolution. But here you have not-- I would say a variable dimension of these raw information.
How does that integrate with deep learning? That has been some big challenge. That's why deep learning with 3D vision started kind of late,
because people were thinking about how we can adapt all these deep learning methods to deal with all these complex
representations for objects, which are not as unified as images.
But meshes are really widely used, and they can be very complex meshes that capture all the details.
For example, you have scanners. You get points, and then you fuse them. And you apply some algorithm. You can get very large mesh.
This one has 56 million triangles and 28 million vertices to represent the sculpture.
And you can have even larger ones, let's say, from Google Earth. They have trillions of triangles. Try to represent basically all the buildings on Earth.
The nice thing about meshes, it supports a lot of operations, like subdivisions. Or I want to have more details and how
can I use more meshes to capture more details of the shape? And you can do simplification as well.
Sometimes, you want to process things very fast, so I don't need that many meshes. I just want to simplify it, and so there
are existing algorithms that allow you to do that as well. And regularization-- if you get irregular mesh,
and sometimes you want to regularize them so that every face is a triangle, they always connect three vertices.
They have roughly the same size and so that it's easier for processing. And they have more obviously good properties
that supports future processing of different graphics algorithms and meshes. There have been people who develop these algorithms as well
so that you can ensure that basically, points at different regions, they are roughly evenly sampled
so that it won't be the case that, OK, let's say the head of the tail or the head of the rabbit is much more densely sampled than the tail
and these kind of things. OK, so this is of one type of shape representations.
And there are other type of representations, for example, parametric representations, because objects
are not just totally irregular. It's not just often a collection of points. In meshes, they're very general.
But sometimes, we lose a lot of information. If you look at, let's say, your chairs or your tables, you have all these straight lines.
So how can you represent these kind of straight lines? And when people design them, they often use some of these parametric representations.
So you can represent shapes as a function. So think about it. So when I design them, I can--
if I want to represent a surface or represent a curve, the underlying degree of freedom is actually lower.
Often, if I have a curve, there's only one underlying degree of freedom. That's why I can represent a curve using
a function f of X. I just varied x and get a value of y. So you can use basically all these different types
of functions in 2D, but also more often in 3D to map
a certain number of variables, the underlying intrinsic dimensionality of the objects, which are often, let's say,
in two or even one, and then mapping into the 3D space. And then this allows you to represent 3D objects
in a parametric representations using basically a set of functions. You can do that for curves, let's say, in circles.
Basically, if you want to represent a circle, you don't really need-- one way is you sample a number of points.
Or you can even connect them, like meshes. You're using the lines. Another way is you just represent the curve
of the circle as this function. Basically, there's a sine function, a cosine function, and you just vary one variable, which is t.
You can think about it as the degrees or angles, and it will map it to all the points on the circles. So here now, you can use a function to represent parametric
representations for curves in 2D. And of course, you can do that in 3D as well.
If you want to represent a sphere, all you need is just two degrees of freedom, u and v.
And then you can go through these functions so that you can map them to every point in 3D space for this sphere.
So people have designed-- I'm not going to detail here-- but more complex parametric representations, like Bézier curves and Bézier surfaces,
which allows you to represent these pretty flexible and smooth surfaces in 3D using basically a few control points.
So you basically use these Bézier functions to capture the underlying lower dimensionalities of these surfaces, and then you can
map the underlying low dimensionality into these flexible shapes.
And they also allow you to do things like subdivision, so you can trying to get more details into the surfaces
and to make it more fine-grained and stuff like that. OK, so that would be the second category of shape representations. You can represent 3D objects in a nonparametric way,
like a collection of unordered points or their connections as meshes. Or you can represent them in a parametric way, where
you have a function, basically. And by varying a few parameters that are underlying the true degree of freedoms of the object
geometry, you can map them into more complex shapes. So basically, everything here, as I said, it has been--
if you remember, at the very beginning, we said there are two types of ways to represent object geometry. One is explicit.
There's more implicit. And all of them, they fall into this category of being quite explicit. So it's like, I have points.
And points are just directly points [INAUDIBLE] on objects. And for the surfaces, or for parametric curves as well,
they directly map it to the points on the objects.
So there are explicit representations. They have a lot of benefits. First, you map all the points directly,
so you can get all these points. In general, every point I have in, let's say, a sample,
I have Bézier surface representations. I can basically sample two points and UV in this underlying
lower dimensional space and then go into that function and map it to a point in the 3D space. So I directly get a point in a 3D space.
So all points are given, in some sense, you can say directly. I can directly get other points. So it's very easy for us to sample points.
So let's say I have this torus, and I have represented using this f function. So now my question is, can you just sample some points
on the surface of the object for me? This is so easy because I would just randomly put in some u and v values.
I just randomly sample those u and v values and then let them go through this function, and it will just compute and give me
some of the 3D points, which are guaranteed to be on this surface of the object. So sampling is much easier.
So what is hard about these explicit representations? The hard thing is it's very hard, in some sense,
to test whether a point is inside or outside the objects. Similarly, if I represent a sphere as this
function, and it's easy for me to sample points on the sphere. But it is hard for me to say, now
I have a different-- now I have a query. I say, at this point, 3 over 4, 1 over 2, 1 over 4. At this point in 3D space, the is the inside object
or the outside object. I think we can maybe--
actually, I'm not even sure about that. So it is actually hard to test whether a certain point is
inside or outside object. So you can see that explicit representations is--
all these representations, they have their own strengths and weaknesses. And for explicit representations, it's actually pretty easy to sample points, which
are very useful because sometimes, you want to convert them into, let's say, a collection of points. And then you want to apply, whatever your point,
neural networks on it. But it is hard to test if a certain point is inside or outside object, which may have some issues.
For example, let's say if you want to use a neural rendering method, and now there's a lot of neural rendering methods,
requires a lot of these kind of queries about whether a point is inside the object or outside object. What would be the geometry or density of object
at that particular point? What would be the material? Or what would be the radiance or color of the object at that particular point?
So essentially, representations are not very supportive of-- it's not easy to run these operations
on these explicit representations. So naturally, people thought, OK, maybe we can come up with a different type of way
to represent geometry. And here I say "implicit" representations for geometry. But as you can see later, in a lot of these neural rendering
methods or deep learning methods, they just extend these implicit representations for not only geometry, but also for colors and appearance of objects in 3D.
So the idea of these implicit representations is now, I want to classify these points.
So I assume, if the points are on the objects, they're on the surface of objects, then they satisfy some certain relationship.
So for example, for a sphere, what would be the points on the sphere, on the unit sphere?
The constraint they satisfy is the square of x and the square of y and square z.
When we sum them up, they equal to 1. So this is constraint they satisfied for all the points
on the sphere. All right, so more generally, you can write it down as the constraint will be some function
of x and y and z equals 0. So in this case, f, x, and y, the function will be x squared plus y squared plus z squared minus 1.
So that would be the function here. But more generally, you can think about it as even for complex shapes, you can represent-- sometimes,
these functions can be so complex that you don't even have a closed form. So how can I represent an f?
I just write it as a neural network. My hope is a neural network will be able to represent it. But in general, the idea is, you have
some function or some constraints that points on a certain object will satisfy.
And this is the way you will represent an object. And this is called implicit representations, which started with geometry.
But as I said, you're now using all these different ways representing textures, materials, appearance, and all these things.
So the good thing about implicit representation-- sorry, let's start with the bad thing. The bad thing about implicit representation
is now it's actually much harder to sample points. I tell you, OK, this is a constraint, let's say, this torus satisfy.
Right, OK, every x and y and z, if I put it into this function, and the output is 0, then, yeah, they
must be on the surface of this object. But then how can I get a couple of these x, y, z tuples?
That would be very hard because they are required to solve this function. And this function is maybe not too hard to solve.
Maybe you can still solve that using some high school math. But when the function gets really complex for arbitrary
shapes, it becomes much harder to solve these functions. So it's not easy to actually now sample points
on the surface of objects if you are representing objects implicitly. But benefit, the strength of that
is now, it's actually pretty easy to test whether a point is inside an object, outside object. Because if I want to do testing, I just have a query,
then this is so easy because it's inside or outside. I just send it into that function. I'll get a value, or the value is minus 1 over 8.
That's smaller than 0. So because I assume the object is represented by this function.
And all the surface points on object, they satisfy that function equals 0. Anything that's, [? I don't know, ?] I would say
lower than 0 is negative. If the output value is negative, then the point must be inside the object.
And if the output value is positive, then the point must be outside the object. So now it becomes much easier to test whether a certain point is
inside or outside object, although it becomes much harder to sample a number of points on the surface of an object.
So you can see now, there is a clear trade-off between these implicit and explicit representations.
Here, again, we talk about geometry. But this distinction and the contrast between explicit and implicit representations, I think,
is very important and fundamental. It is behind development, deep neural networks when they apply
to 3D data in general, as we'll see later. So before we-- let's [? see, I'm at ?] 25 minutes.
So I promise I spend no more than five minutes, and we're going to talk about deep learning. So before we talk about how deep learning can be applied to 3D
representations in general, a little bit more on implicit representations is-- some other features of implicit representations,
the good things about them is it's easy to compose them. So sometimes, you feel like, oh, if I actually
represent everything with a function, that seems great if I have a closed form, but also seem
very constrained because every closed form, I can write it out. The geometries look very, very regular.
So if I want to represent the shape of a cow, how would I represent that? What would be the function I can write for the shape of a cow?
It's just not obvious. But the nice thing about implicit representation is you don't have to write everything in one shot,
because it's so easy to compose them. You can actually perform logical operations on these implicit functions. Let's say you have two objects, and you
find unions or intersections or differences. Again, they're just values. So you put x, y, z onto this function.
You get a value. You put x, y, z onto that function. You get a value. You can just do arithmetic operations
on top of these values, and that allows you to compute the unions or intersections of differences between these objects.
And eventually, you can compose them to divide pretty complex shapes. And this is actually behind support
a lot of these industrial designs when people are designing complex parts for, I would say,
I don't know. I mean, when you're doing manufacturing, you have to fabricate some complex shapes.
A lot of these designs are done by these CAD models, Computer-Aided Designs. And they're composing these implicit functions
using simple logical operations. And you can also do things that are beyond just logical.
You can even add things up, especially if you have a distance function, where every point is like, oh, the positive value and the negative value--
the values actually have meanings because they indicate how far you are to the surface of the object. So you can even add them up, and this allows you
to smoothly blend the shapes. So you can see that here, if I have a distance function,
and here I just want to represent a vertical line, OK, this is here. And then anything that's minus 0 is to the left of the line.
Anything that is positive is to the right of the line. And then you have another line representing using a different function.
So what happens if you add them up? If you add them up, then it naturally becomes an interpolation between these two shapes.
This is an example of doing things in 1D. But you can imagine you can even similarly doing things in 3D
in a sense, OK, now you can actually even blend these different shapes. And these distance functions can be arbitrarily composed
and allow you to create actually pretty complex worlds, like this. And this is not easy, but you can even think about it.
You can construct really complex with all the details worlds by just simply--
not simply, by difficulty, but compose these different functions. But they are actually very expressive if you're
very good at it. OK, so we said, OK, we have parametric representation that
can be explicit, that directly give you points on the 3D surface. Or we can have parametric representations, like these functions.
But they're implicit. So they're just like, OK, now you can only try to verify if the point is inside or outside an object.
But then you can also compose them to build more complex shapes. And is that possible for us to also have
implicit representation and nonparametric, like that point style, but then you also querying functions? Well, sometimes, they actually do have things like that.
This eventually goes to methods like level set methods. So implicit surfaces are very nice because as we said,
it's easy to merge them. It's easy to split them. But sometimes, it's hard to describe, as we said,
complex shapes in closed forms. You have a cow. How would you represent it? You can compose them.
But if every time I have to query whether a certain point is inside a cow, you have to have hundreds of functions.
And you perform all these add and or, and/or, plus/minus operations. Then it takes a long time.
So what if I just prequery? So I have a 3D space, and I just sample, let's say,
a 100 by 100 by 100 grid. So I have now a million points sampled. And for these 1 million points, I just
precompute whether they're inside the objects or outside the objects, what is the distance of these points to the surfaces for a complex shapes?
So you can precompute them, and then you can store all the values in a matrix. This is in 2D.
But this is for visualization. But in practice, it's in 3D. So you have a 3D matrix that store all these precomputed
values of the distance functions. So now, in some sense, you still have an implicit representation. But because you have prequeried them,
you turned it into nonparametric representations. And even if you just look at this matrix in 2D,
you can now still find where the boundaries are. So where are the boundaries? They're just basically where you have two adjacent values.
One is positive, and one is negative. So that means there must be somewhere in between. That is the point here.
They satisfy the function f of x equals 0, which means the point must be on the surface.
So in that sense, you are turning on parametric representation or implicit
into nonparametric representations by prequerying a lot of these points using the functions.
And this allows you to have actually more explicit controls because you can now visualize them.
You can say, I have this matrix. And I can visualize them based on their values. And this is used a lot in things like CTs and MRIs and all
these medical data. And a related thing is people may say, OK, what if I don't care about all these distance values?
I can prequery what's going on at all these points, but then I compute all the values. I say plus 5, minus 5.
But all I care about is whether this is inside or outside object. So if it's positive, I'll just treat them as one.
If it's negative, which means they're inside object, treat them as 0, let's say. So if you binarize them, then this gives you
a final representation, which is arguably the easiest to understand is this is called voxels.
So you can prequery where the implicit functions are, and then you have all these, density-sampled grid.
But now, instead of storing their distance functions, how far they are from the surface by going through the functions and give you plus 5, minus 5,
you just binarize it. You only care about whether a certain point is inside objects or outside objects.
Then you have a voxel representation, which is again like a 3D matrix, can be 100 by 100 by 100.
But for every point, you have to go through this function and query whether it's inside and outside objects.
You have 1 or 0, and you can represent objects in a binarized way. So this gives you the final representation I'm going to talk
about for objects in 3D. So I have introduced voxels in a kind of complex way.
But from a different perspective, people may say, this is actually very easy to understand because, in some sense, voxels actually have a lot of analogy as pixels,
because pixels are 2D matrices. And now you have 3D matrices, and voxels is basically just
a 3D matrix. So although, you can see that they have connections with all the other ways that we
can represent shapes. And the way I'm introducing it this way is, actually,
when deep learning comes in-- so first, deep learning, when did it start? 2010. Deep learning has been there for a long time,
but the modern deep learning thing is 2010. Geoff Hinton started doing that on speech recognition.
And in 2012, they have AlexNet, which was written on ImageNet. So you've learned all these, and they're all in 2D.
OK, now people say, OK, what if I want to do in 3D? This is a very natural thought. So I want to go from 2D convolution neural networks--
2012, there's no transformer. So how can I apply a 2D convolution neural network on 3D
data? And everyone knows we have all these different 3D representations. But which one do you begin with?
It turns out that people will say, OK, yeah, the people who started doing deep learning on 3D data,
they're the computer vision people. They're not the graphics people. They're like, oh, I've been working with pixels. And maybe the easiest thing I can do is just to scale up.
And instead of working on 2D matrices, I just make it work on 3D matrices. So that would be the simplest thing I can do. Instead of having 2D convolution network,
I have a volumetric convolution neural network. Then, which of these representations allow you or support a volumetric convolution?
It turned out to be this voxel representation. This is basically the easiest you can imagine.
But the graphics people don't agree with that, because the graphics people are like, oh, this voxel [? representation ?] is really bad because it's very slow to compute.
As we talked about, we have this [INAUDIBLE] sample all these values. And there, you can look at the quality.
It's so bad compared with meshes or point clouds. So people are like, why do you want to start with that? But the reason that people started doing deep learning
on 3D data with voxels, because I think it's-- it's so easy to draw an analogy between pixels and voxels,
and you just have to change one of the code. That is, instead of doing 2D convolution, now do 3D convolution.
So that's, in some sense, how things get started. But before I talk about the deep learning methods for 3D data,
another aspect that's very important is the data-- sorry, for 3D data, yeah. So beyond methods, data sets are also very important.
ImageNet really prompted AlexNet and stuff like that. So for 3D, similarly, we have to collect a lot of data as well.
So pre-3D, pre-deep learning, the common data sets or popular data set people often use is this thing called Princeton data
Shape Benchmark, which has 1,800 models, 180 categories. So you can see they actually have quite a lot of categories,
180 categories. But there are only 1,800 models, which means there are basically 10 models per [INAUDIBLE] year, which is so small.
But back then, it was considered pretty large. And people feel like, oh, this is already enough to do because we can't really make anything really
work well on them. And there was very little machine learning there. So prior to 2014, all these data sets are more or less small.
They may have a certain number of models, even up to 10,000, 9,000, 10,000. But they're also divided into so many different classes.
And so each class, you only have 10 models each or less than 100, I would say. So after that, people started by saying, OK, if we have ImageNet,
can we also have the 3D data sets for shapes? So this is behind efforts of a few concurrent work.
But really, I think eventually, they consolidated into this thing called ShapeNet, which is, a lot of them are actually led by Stanford.
There's Leo Guibas and Silvio Savarese. So they led these large data sets called ShapeNet,
which has 3 million models. But in practice, just ImageNet, you have this large image.
And there's a smaller data set that people often use. So ShapeNet, similarly, you have a ShapeNet core data set, which is what people typically use as basically 50,000 models
in 55 categories. Now you can see, for every category, you have 1,000 models on average. But in practice, it's not a balance.
So for chairs, you have actually a lot more. So that's why people say, oh, now I have finally I have thousands of models on chairs.
I can train some deep networks on it. Before I just-- you can have 10 models. You can't do anything. So this is how things started, and so there
has been a few years where a lot of these advances and all the results are just presented on chairs and cars
because these are the largest categories in ShapeNet And people feel like, OK, that's great. But then that's not enough.
So we should move even bigger. So in the past few years, this is work at AI2,
the Allen Institute from Seattle, where what they did is they collected much larger data sets called Objaverse and Objaverse Extra Large that you have
roughly 1 million or 10 million models for different 3D assets. And you can see they have much more categories.
These models are on average also have a higher quality also with textures.
So these are synthetic data sets. But also, there are real data sets that are being produced, including some of them are from 3D scans.
You just take 3D scanners. Back in 2016, people have been working on it.
This is a data set called, I think, the Redwood data set or something. So you have 10,000 scans of real-world objects.
And more recently, people have been building larger data sets where they also encourage people.
I think this is an effort co-led by Meta and Oxford. So they encourage people to take data for them.
They also pay people to take data for them. So people just, using an iPhone-- you have an object. You put it on a table. You use an iPhone.
You take a 360 video around objects, and then you get $1 or something like that. So they encourage people to take data for them.
This is the first version. They have 19,000 videos of objects. These are real objects because capturing real objects
is much harder. And the object version and all the things I talked about before, it was synthetic objects. But these are real objects.
And then, also because a lot of the development in 3D vision algorithms, you can actually take these 360 videos and try
to reconstruct the 3D objects. So now you have paired data of the videos or images of objects,
as well as their 3D geometries and textures.
This is the first version. I think they have a more recent version, V2, or maybe even V3 right now, which is supposed to be a little larger.
But still, it is hard to scale up. Think about it. Right now, you have 90,000 videos or basically 90,000
objects. And I think they're scaling it up, but I don't think it's over 100,000. So basically, you can think about it as, for real objects,
you have 100,000 models. But if you look at, What's the data set size of the images?
So it's [? in the ?] lie on 5 B or whatever. That's like 5 billion images. And Google and OpenAI must have much larger data sets.
So there's still a huge gap between the number of data points that you can have for 2D images or videos versus you can
have for 3D objects. So I think that's a big challenge, how we can move forward with 3D vision. And people have different ideas.
But still, this is much larger than what we had before. At least you can. It's possible that you can still, more or less,
train some deep learning models on these data sets now. And quickly, there are also other data sets that people
being built on parts. This is also from Stanford, where they try to annotate a little bit of object parts and their correspondence and hierarchies.
And also, there's this data set called
PartNet, where they want to annotate not only the parts and the semantics, but also how they may move. So a little bit of mobility information of different parts.
Like, the laptop, you can open and close it. And there are also data sets for 3D scenes, so not only just objects and parts.
But there are also the rooms. So there have been things like the scan data sets.
These are people who actually just go inside your home or go inside your-- actually, to our office as well. They just come in, and then they just have a 3D scanner.
They scan the home, and then they have some annotations. So here and more recently, again, you
can do that even with your iPhone right now. But still, these kind of data sets are much smaller.
So here this one, the first version scanner you have 1,500. I think they they have a ++ for the second version,
which is roughly the same size, maybe 2,000 or 3,000 rooms. So the amount of data you have for 3D data,
for 3D scenes in particular, is also even much smaller than the amount of data you have for 3D objects.
So I think it's not obvious that how can we go beyond that constraints, because if you have to scan it yourself, you're always
bounded by how much time you have and how much people you have.
Anyway, but there are attempts being made in trying to collect data.
And finally, if you want to apply deep learning on to 3D vision, so what are the tasks we care about?
So there are generative modeling, just like your generative-- just like what Justin said. You can generate 2D images or videos.
You can also generate 3D shapes. You can generate 3D scenes. You can make them condition. The condition can be condition on language, condition on image.
You have an input image. And how can you reconstruct the 3D objects? And you have to learn the shape priors.
You have to do shape generation, completion. Sometimes, you have a partial object, and you want to repair it.
You want to fix it. So there's geometric data processing as well. Other tasks, including discriminative models.
For example, you have a 3D shape. How can you classify what's the category of objects it belongs to?
Is it a chair or a table? And a lot of them now are actually done by rendering them into pixels
because you have very good image recognition models, like GPT or something. So you just take a 3D object.
You can render them into a picture. You can upload a picture to GPT, and they can do it for you. So that's, in some sense, one way
of solving these discriminative problems. But there are also more specific things that it's not very easy to solve.
For example, you have a different type of cell. And you have the 3D scans. And how can you classify the cell and all these more
specialized domains where you don't have that much data? So how can you solve these discriminative problems?
And joint modeling of 2D and 3D data, which is becoming more and more important because the two data, we have so much more.
We have so many images and videos. We have very good foundation models that are trained on them. So how can we leverage the priors in our 2D foundation
models? Like, what an image look like, how to make an image look realistic, how to make a video look realistic.
How can we use that information to help our 3D reconstruction to be more realistic? So joint modeling in 2D and 3D data--
because there are so many large-scale 2D data sets and very good pretrained models. And also, there has been a lot of advances in neural rendering
or differential rendering methods that basically connect 3D world and 2D world. Because you have 3D world. You have 3D model.
You can render them into 2D. The rendering process can be made differentiable or can be approximated with neural networks.
Then, now you can connect all these data in different modalities through differentiable neural networks, allows you to bridge the priors you have in 2D data or 2D
foundation models into the 3D world. Yeah, and sometimes, you want to even do some joint multimodal
beyond visual data, including text data. But sometimes, you have other data. Let's say, in robotics, you often have tactile data.
So how to fuse them as well. And sometimes, for autonomous driving, maybe you have LiDAR data or depth data.
How can you fuse them as well? So I want to use deep learning on 3D data to solve all these
different problems. So we spend all the time talking about representations. So how do we begin with?
So as I suggested, people who are initially doing that is the computer vision people who work on pixels.
They work on images. So naturally, they say, why don't we start with voxels? But even before that, they say, OK, this is an old idea.
And this is the very first idea that people tried in applying deep learning to 3D vision. And now, in some sense, it's coming back.
But the very first idea they tried is, now, let's don't even worry about voxels. Let's just say you have a 3D shape.
It's a mesh. It's voxel, whatever. And I want you to learn to recognize what an object is.
What is the object here? It's a chair. But what if the input is 3D data? How can we process that?
Before we have a 3D deep learning method, what if I just render it into images because I have very good
image models? I just take the 3D objects. I would just put camera at different places.
I can render all these images, the objects from different views. And then, now this becomes a 2D problem.
I will just apply a convolutional neural network on each of these views, and I have some ways to fuse them.
So I have some pooling, whatever. And then I just do image classification. So this becomes an image classification problem.
Well, the only difference being, now you have multiple views. So this is like, in some sense, one of the very first ideas
people applied to 3D vision. They just used 2D networks. And why do you want to use 2D networks? Because back then, they were pushing on ImageNet.
And they're very good. So ImageNet is much larger than 3D data sets. So any model that are pretrained on ImageNet,
they have very good performance. So the easiest way to solve this 3D recognition problem is to first render it into 2D.
Later, people move away from it because people are like, oh, we have more 3D data. We should try to do 3D native--
come up with 3D native methods. And people also come up with ideas about connecting 3D and 2D through neural rendering.
But now I feel like this trend is coming back because all these image and video models are getting so great. I don't know if many of you may have seen the VL3
or whatever, was released yesterday? Right. So if they're so great, maybe we should just rely a bit more
on the image and video foundation models, again, because they are just trained on a thousand times or tens
of thousands of times, or even more than that, maybe a million times more data than 3D data. So how can we incorporate that?
But coming back, now this is the very first method. In some sense, people try to apply deep learning on 3D data
just by converting them into 2D. And they do very well in shape classification.
They have shapes, and you want to classify them into different categories. And they have very good performance.
And yeah, so you can leverage a lot of literatures on 2D image pretrained models.
But the issue is you need some projections. But sometimes, the input can be very noisy.
People are like, what if my input is too noisy? The point clouds, or whatever, they're just not very good. If I render them, they look kind of bad.
So is it possible for us to come up with more 3D native methods? So later, people tried a number of 3D native methods that just
apply deep learning directly on 3D data. As I said, the easiest way to do this is just to apply your pixel convolution neural network
into a voxel, volumetric convolution neural network. So this is actually a Deep Belief Network,
which is generative network. But still, you have some 3D convolutional filters. And this is in 2015 by Princeton.
And you can see that in their generative model, that can actually synthesize 3D shapes in the form of 3D voxels
at relatively lower resolution. But this is 10 years ago now. So back then, this was considered pretty impressive.
And you can do all these condition generations, conditional semantic labels at bats and a desk and tables.
You can synthesize these different shapes. And because this is a generative network, you can also use it for classification.
So you can do image shape classification as well. And later, something that actually we did
is what if we just apply it the GANs, this Generative Adversarial Network? You can use GANs to generate 2D pixels.
There's no reason you cannot use GANs to generate 3D voxels. So we just did this very simple thing, and that is applied a GAN to 3D voxels and actually give you
a pretty good generation of 3D objects. This is eight, nine years ago.
Yeah, OK. And later, with training from CMU, we also did an extension.
That is, you can use GANs to not only generate 3D shapes, but also you can render them into 2D.
You can project them into 2D surfaces so that you can get the depth map of the 3D objects you generated.
And then you can use a cyclegan to convert this depth map into a color image.
Now you can have adversarial losses not only on 3D shapes, but also on 2D pictures. You want 3D shapes to look realistic so that they can be
indistinguishable from the 3D object data you have. You also want the 2D images to look realistic so that
they're indistinguishable from images of real cars. So then you can do 3D generation,
as well as 2D generation at the same time. And because you have different latent vectors for the shapes,
for the viewpoints, and for the textures, you also have some level of controllability. Like, you can change the viewpoint.
You can change the textures. You can do interpolation. And you can transfer the texture of one car
onto the shape of another car. This is 2018.
So people tried applying deep networks, like convolutional neural networks, generative adversarial networks, on 3D voxels instead of 2D
pixels. And can we do a little bit better with voxels? Because one thing that people have complained about voxels
is they're just really slow. You have to presample them. And there are a lot of wasted effort because a lot of sample points are just like empty space.
Or there are inside objects, and it gives you no information. So naturally, people thought, OK, can we actually make it better?
So there are improvements to voxels, like octave trees. The idea of octave trees is you still
have explicit representations. Sorry, in some sense, you can argue it's an implicit representation. But it's like nonparametric implicit representations.
But then, instead of representing every point in space at a uniform scale, you actually--
assuming the voxels or-- yeah, basically, the voxels can be of different sizes,
I just divide the divide space into different regions. And I spend a lot more. And when I feel like I'm really close to the surface
of the objects, I just represent objects in a much finer scale. And when I'm in this empty space or inside objects,
where I really don't care too much about what's going on, I can have huge voxels in some sense.
So you can recursively partition the space, and you can have different sizes of voxels at different space.
And this allows you to really scale up. So you can see that compared with just directly using voxels,
this is 2019-ish. People say, OK, octave trees are great because it allows
me to go from lower resolution. That's how much you can fit into GPU memory. You can do 64 by 64 with voxels.
But with octave trees, you can do 256. And you can even use that for generation as well.
You can generate objects also. They look like voxels, but they're higher resolution
because you're more efficient in representing the space. So these are the very early attempts in applying deep
learning to 3D space. And you're like, OK, why don't we just try voxels? Then this is the moment where people
have got a bit more interest into like, oh, no, now what if you the graphics people feel like-- you're just
doing all this wrong. Because why do you want to use this kind of pretty inefficient, ugly-looking representations,
like voxels or octave trees? Now we have all these good representations-- point clouds, meshes, splines.
Why are we not using these representations? But as we said, the challenge is, points are here and there. How can you even apply convolutional points and stuff
like that? It's just not very obvious. But people start to look into it. So naturally, people move into applying or developing new deep
learning methods that directly work on not only just 3D data, but also different types of 3D representations,
like point clouds. So in PointNet, I think this is an important work also
from Stanford, from Leo's team. What's going on here is they develop a new type of deep
network that directly works with 3D point clouds. So it's called PointNet.
So the idea is, for points, you have to be permutation invariant because if I have point 1 and point 2 OK, point 1 is here,
and point 2 is here. Now I have a different input. I would say point 1 here and point 2 there.
So then whatever-- your network should be invariant to these two types of input, which means no matter
how I name, this one is point 1, that one is point 2, or I name this one's point 1, that one
is point 2, your output should be the same, because the points there are unordered. There's no guaranteed ordering in the sense
that our top left is 1, 1. Bottom right is 100, 100. So if there's an order, if the points are unordered,
you have to be permutation invariant. So how can we do that?
And second is you have to be also sampling invariant. So sometimes, you sample, say, 10 points
on the head of the bunny or rabbit and 5 points on the tail of the rabbit.
And sometimes, you sample 10 points on the tail of the rabbit, only 5 points on the head of the rabbit. So how can you also be invariant to that?
Because there's no guarantee on how your sample points. So there are a bit of a issue here and there,
but the one idea they imply, they used, and I think it's basically probably the most important point,
is they just-- I just apply-- it's also so simple. I just apply a symmetric function on the embeddings of the points.
So basically, for all the points, I first compute some embeddings for them,
just like you compute embeddings for different regions or different windows of image. And I compute the features for each point.
And then I just have to fuse them. But because I want them to be permutation invariant, so I just use a symmetric function in the sense
that, for example, it can be just a max function. And I take the maximum, softmax. It can also be a sum function.
I just add them up. So that's what's going on. This is so simple. You have a number of points, 1, 2, 3 or 1, whatever.
And then you have compute embeddings for them, and they just aggregate them. You can compute the max for each dimension. You can sum them up or stuff like that.
And yeah. And you have this aggregated embeddings for all the points. And then you go through maybe a few layers
of fully connected networks and stuff like that. And then you use it to classify all--
are these points are really representing a chair or a table? So that's basically what's going on,
and it turned out to be quite powerful. And of course, there have been a lot of the improvements
on top of that. People have been coming up with new methods that improve on PointNet. They have PointNet++.
And there are things people have been trying to do, is graph neural networks because you can easily translate points
into nodes of a graph, and then the neighborhood, the proximity, whether points are close to each other as the edges
connecting these points. So there have been like graph neural networks and all these other methods that have been developed for these point cloud processing.
But the original idea in the PointNet paper is so simple, and it turned out to be also very powerful.
Something else you want to consider is you also want to measure. For pixels, it's easy. I have an output image.
I have the ground truth image. I just compute the differences between the two. I have two loss or whatever.
For points, how would you compare the output point cloud and the input point cloud, especially if you care about generation task?
If you do a classification, that's fine. You have input point cloud, and output is chair, table, whatever.
You have a cross-entropy loss. That's all you need. But if you output, if you're doing a generation task,
and you have a voxels, it's also easy. Just do a cross-entropy loss of the 100 by 100 by 100 voxel grid.
But if your output is a point and 100 points, and how would you compare the output point cloud versus the ground truth
point cloud? You have to also design distance metrics. So the two common distance metrics that people did use--
one is called the Chamfer distance. A Chamfer distance is easy to understand. That is you have two sets of points. And for each point on each side or each set,
you just basically find the nearest neighbor. So you have a collection of red points. You have a collection of blue points.
And for the red point, for each of red points, you just find its nearest neighbor in the blue set. And for each of the blue points, you just
find the nearest neighbor in the red set. And you want to minimize the distance, minimize the distance of each point to its nearest neighbor in the other set.
And the second idea, loss function that people may use is called Earth Mover distance. And here you do a bipartite matching between the two
sets of points, and you have a one-to-one paired matching between these points, and you want to minimize the distance among all these pairs.
So these are the two common metrics that people use when they're comparing the distance between the point clouds. And they can be made differentiable,
which means you can now compute the gradients and use it to optimize your neural network so that hopefully, the output better point
clouds if you're caring about a point cloud generation problem. So we have moved from voxels to point clouds.
And then people were like, OK, this is great. And now I can process the points, I can output points.
But we also have other beautiful partitions like splines. They're very good at capturing the surfaces of objects.
If you use any kind of neural network to generate voxels or generate point clouds, they always look very ugly.
So they don't have smooth surfaces and stuff like that. So how can we have a neural network that can output or understand objects, but also represent
the beautiful surfaces? So people go a bit forward in thinking about how I can integrate neural networks with things
like splines or functions like that. And a notable example-- here is this thing called AtlasNet.
So what's going on here is they try to use deep learning. But then, instead of directly outputting a set of 3D point
clouds, so I learned a transformation function. I have latent shape representations.
And then, if you remember, when we say you have these parametric representation of object shapes, you're basically transforming,
let's say, a 2D space of u and v into a 3D space, like a sphere.
And for simple things like sphere, it's easy. You can write it down. What is that function in sine and cosine or whatever?
But for complex objects, it is very hard to write a function. And often, there is no closed form. So the idea here is, OK, if there is no closed form,
then why don't we just use a neural network to represent that? So here you can see this neural network,
which is implemented as MLP, just learns that function f. You can take the two values, u and v, as the input
to the function f. And the neural networks is performing the computation of the function f and u and v and output a point in 3D space.
So it's basically learning how we are able to transform this 2D space into the 3D space, and it might be too hard to represent
the entire object using a single transformation. So people thought, OK, we can use a couple of small neural networks.
So think about it as now you have a piece of paper. You can fold it in different ways. You can fold it multiple times.
And all these things get put together to form the final shapes you care about.
So this is, you can see, the differences between these two, three different representations. You have an input image.
And if you want to represent it reconstructed using voxels, you can see it's doing something.
But you're really bounded by limited resolution voxels. And for point clouds, yeah, you're no longer
bounded by the resolutions. And it gives you maybe a bit more details. But the points are really unordered.
You cannot really get any smooth surfaces out of the point clouds. And for this thing called AtlasNet, which is basically
learning transform pieces, you can see that they have actually smoother surfaces. So using neural network to represent
how you can map a parametric representation from a low-dimensional space to a higher-dimensional space,
and you learn multiple of these mappings. And when they are combined, they give you the final output geometries conditioned on 2D images.
OK, so finally, in some sense, we can put it this way.
So what is deep network doing when they're doing ImageNet classification? They're basically learning very complex functions
that map input images in the form of pixels into a final category label.
Is it a cat or a dog or person or whatever? That function is really complex, and output space
is really small. Output space is 1,000 dimensions. So it's like, OK, it's a cat or dog? You have 1,000 way classification.
Output space is so small. Input space is much larger because you have 500 by 500 pixels. So that's 250,000 or something.
Input space is much larger. Output space is really small. The function is really hard to write.
Is it possible for me to write down some formulas so that I can classify the input image by computing
whatever, some specific values and output if this is a cat or dog? I cannot do that. The function is so hard to write.
There's no closed form. That's why I need a deep network. Input space is large. Output space is small. So if you really think about deep networks that way and think
about what they are doing, then you realize a lot of the things that we have been doing with deep networks on 3D shapes,
it doesn't seem to map that mapping to that, I would say, equation.
So it doesn't map that well. And what are the representations that really map them-- map it the best? What's the optimal representations
that seems to really fit into the paradigm? And if we think more carefully, I think, around 2019,
then people realize, oh, yeah, in some sense, deep network is an implicit function. And why don't we just use it to represent implicit function
for object 3D geometry? So instead of representing the voxels because now you're just doing--
you turn it into pixels, but then you just scale up into 3D. And you apply 3D convolution.
But fundamentally, voxel is really about whether the thing is inside and outside the object.
So instead of just directly prequerying the space and get the voxels and apply a convolution on top of it,
what if I just directly using deep network to perform that query for me so that I don't have to run 3D convolution
or anything? I just query a space in 3D, and deep network should tell me if the output can just be one dimensional inside and outside,
whether that point is inside a 3D shape or outside a 3D shape. So finally, I think people move that leap,
take the leap to go from specific representations on point clouds or splines into implicit representations,
but not directly working on voxels. But instead, think about it as a level set or some implicit functions that use deep network to represent.
That's the final step. Going from this AtlasNet or whatever, you're learning the transformation from a 2D space
to 3D space. But now I can directly do an implicit query using the deep networks. So that goes to deep implicit functions, which
is interesting because around that time, in 2019, there are four papers that are doing almost exactly
the same thing. They all argue that before we have been using voxels and point clouds and meshes, or whatever, they have their own strengths
or weakness. But really, the right thing to do is I should just send the query into the deep network.
So deep network, what it should do is just take the input, let's say x, y, z-coordinate, and output
whether that point is inside and outside the object. And that would be, in some sense, the final, I would say,
one of the final. And that's the kind of idea that was proposed in 2019. And even right now, in 2025, a lot of people
have been still using this same idea. That is, I would just use deep network to tell me whether a point is inside or outside an object.
And not only you can go a little bit beyond then, just like a binary classification of inside and outside,
because you can also say, oh, maybe I care a bit more. I say, what would be the signed distance function? How far the point is from the surface of the object.
Or what would be the density values of the point? Or later, what will be the color? What will be the radiance values of the point?
But here, starting from 2019, people really start to apply deep network in a way that is, in some sense,
similar to classification. That is, I take points in 3D space and use it as an implicit
function to query some properties of the points in 3D space. And people have tried to use it as represent a collection
of implicit functions, not just how PCs are deforming into the 3D space to get different pieces of papers
in 3D, but really representing implicit parts of the objects using small neural networks. And they can form a complex shapes.
And if you can represent objects in 3D using implicit functions,
you can do that not only for geometry. You can query not only the inside or whether a point is inside or outside objects,
whether how far the point is from the surface of the object. You can also query, what will be the radiance?
What will be the color of the object? And then I go directly one year later. This is maybe one or two years later. Now, people come up with this thing called NeRF So
where they used differences here is now say-- or I should use deepen our knowledge to query, what will be the signed distance function
or density of the objects, but also querying the radiance? So here you can see what's going on is you query NeRF about x, y,
z-coordinate in the 3D space. In addition to that, because we are trying to model the appearance as well, you also
query the viewing directions, the camera viewing directions. And the output of the neural network is not just like 1 or 0,
inside, outside. It is the density values in addition to the color values or the radiance.
And if you directly train implicit functions on 3D shapes, and then you require 3D supervision.
So if you have a collection of 3D objects, you can use them as a supervision. That gives you-- OK, you have the ground truth about whether
a point is inside or outside a 3D object. But here you want to train on 2D images.
That's what's going on with NeRF. So they also put that together with the neural rendering-- volume rendering function.
And they made this volume rendering function differentiable in the sense that you can have a rendering model,
you can query all these different points in 3D space. You can get their colors, and also
their densities in appearance. And then you can compute how much light is blocked along the way.
So this is basically volume rendering as in computer graphics. There's very minimal change made because you can see,
even directly from the volume-rendering equations, that everything here is-- this is an approximation.
But with approximation, everything here is differentiable. So you can compute how much light--
if the neural network gives you the density, which is-- basically, you can think of it as opacity of the point in 3D
space, and it also gives you the color, then you can compute how much light has been blocked by the points that are sampled ahead of that point.
And along the way, and you can compute also how much light is there contributing
to what I'm going to see in this ray from any particular point? So now you have a few things.
You have neural networks to represent implicit functions for the colors or radiance and the densities. And then you have this volume render equations,
which is made differentiable so that you can learn directly from 2D images.
So these are the two things that have changed. And one is, I no longer have to train on 3D shapes. I can train on 2D images with this volume rendering equations.
And the second is, instead of just looking into geometry or density of objects in 3D, I also look into their radiance
or appearance in 3D. So these two changes lead to the kind of big jump behind, from NeRF, or from implicit functions
or deep [? SDF ?] and all these other methods to NeRF. So a lot of people feel like, oh yeah, NeRF has been great.
It seems like out of nowhere. That's really not the case because they're very much inspired-- if you look at the articles they later
wrote themselves, they are very much inspired by all these advances in deep intrinsic functions.
Although, they focus only on geometry. But now I do both geometry and appearance.
And I do learning from 2D images instead of 3D shapes. So yeah, here are some results of NeRF.
This you may have seen many times.
OK, so if you remember, we said, in the past, we have been working on something like generating 3D
shapes, and then also generating their 2D appearances. Here, at the very beginning, we used the representation
that is voxels. But now, as we said, yeah, NeRF is great.
And if we have implicit representations, there's no need to really represent it as voxels. What if we just replace that with the radiance fields?
So we also did that as well. So we have a neural network that capture the implicit radiance fields and densities.
But it is generative neural network. And then you can even still apply the same GAN rendering framework so that you can render objects in 3D,
as well as their 2D pictures. And you can also do the same thing as controllability. And you can change the camera viewpoint.
You can change object identity, but you can keep the viewpoint. You can do all the things that you can do before.
But now with NeRF, you can learn directly from images. So you don't have to restrict yourself to the categories of cars or chairs, where you have a lot of 3D data,
because you can learn directly from images. Yeah, so you can see that now, the output becomes much more
realistic. So this is the thing we did called [? pigeon ?] with Eric Chen as a first author,
and also with mostly people from Gordon's group.
OK, and finally, NeRF is great, but then NeRF has this issue
that is, you have to sample a lot of points in 3D. You're no longer presampling them and then applying
a volumetric convolution. But still, just like a level set, you have to sample all the points and create neural network all the time.
And now you can do it learning from 2D. You can do all these great things. But because you still have to do all the sampling,
it is very slow. So people thought a little bit more. Again, from the graphics people, they were like, OK, I have this good idea about points and meshes.
And the nice thing about them is they are free in space. They're very efficient. So is that possible for us to integrate the two?
Can I have an implicit representations? But maybe I don't have to have a fixed sampling grid. I don't have to sample all the times,
because it takes so much time. So maybe I really should put them together. So you can argue that NeRF tried to parameterize densities--
sorry, parameterize the scenes very, very densely, you have to sample all the points density in 3D.
A lot of points are wasted, just like in voxels. You have all the points that are representing empty space. You don't want that.
In NeRF, a lot of sampling, a lot of queries are also querying empty space. And network may give you a density of 0
or something like that, but it's taking a lot of time. So how can we address that?
What If I just try to sample things more sparsely? I still have this implicit representations.
But instead of sampling empty spaces all the time, I only sample at places where I know there are stuff.
But how can I know that? What if I have a point representations? So this is the idea behind this thing called Gaussian splats,
which you may have heard of. So it still has the same implicit functions. You're querying neural network for densities and for appearance
and stuff like that. But instead of creating neural network all the time, I have a point representation of the 3D Gaussian blobs in the 3D
space, which I think sometimes you can think about them as point clouds. But the points are not like a single point.
They're like a blob. They're like some regions. And because you know where these blobs are,
when you're sending out a ray from your camera to the 3D space and sample points, you don't have to sample all the time.
You just look at where these blobs are, and then you can know-- based on the radius
of these different Gaussians, you will only sample at regions where you know there is some stuff. So this makes rendering much more efficient.
And so here are some of the reconstruction results using 3D Gaussian splats.
And you can see that in terms of quality, they're actually not that--
they're comparable. I would say they're comparable to NeRFs. This is different metrics, PSNR, SSIM.
They're like rendering qualities. And I think the y-axis, it doesn't start from 0. So this is a little misleading.
But basically, you can see these numbers are really close. So in terms of quality, rendering quality, Gaussian splats and NeRFs are similar, at least
when they're first proposed. But Gaussian splats are just much more efficient. So this is FPS, Frame Per Second.
You can render 150 pictures per second. Well, for NeRF, it takes you maybe 20 seconds
to render just a single picture. So now this thing is now made 1,000 times faster.
At least that's what they argued. So because you no longer waste all your computing power on sampling empty space and query neural networks
all the time about these points that are in the empty space.
OK, yeah, so that is basically how deep learning has been integrated on 3D data in all these different representations,
how they got started, how they have evolved, and its connection with all these different shape representations. And one thing we didn't talk about--
we just use two minutes to quickly cover it-- is there has been also interesting
things about object geometry that is not only about the element geometry, the specific details about the parts, but also the structures.
Because often, there could be-- the chairs are symmetric. So we talk a little bit about it, where there's a parametric surface.
And you can parameterize part of the surface using a sphere or stuff like that, using these closed form equations.
And that gives you a little bit of symmetry. But there has been also more systematic studies about the regularities or structures within object
geometry, including their repetitions, including their symmetries. And people also come up with different representations for it
as well. So how can we really represent-- in some sense, you can argue that point clouds, meshes, implicit functions,
they're really representing the geometric details maybe for the individual parts. None of them is directly capturing
things like regularities, like symmetry and repetition. So how can we capture that? A few other attempts that people have been exploring, mostly
from the graphics community, is I can represent objects just basically as a collection of these simple geometric parts,
like a part set. And there has been methods that apply deep learning on it,
representing using deep networks to represent different parts of objects, using simple geometric primitives, and then compose them,
or using implicit functions and compose them, as we talked about before. But there has also been attempts to do a bit more, so not just
like representing objects as a collection of parts without considering their relationships, but also modeling the relationships
between these parts. This is even more so the case for scenes, let's say, a bed.
Our bad is usually next to the wall. Chairs is usually next to the tables, and stuff like that. So you not only want to represent them
as unrelated collection of parts or objects. You want to capture their relationships as well.
In the hierarchies, when you are constructing, when you're building-- you're doing some constructions,
your architecture. You're an architect. You're designing a building, then, of course,
you're not just representing objects or their relationships. You have to consider hierarchies, what you build first.
There's a classroom, and a classroom has-- there's some tables and chairs in it, and chairs has parts. There's basically a level hierarchy
and how this can be used and integrated with neural networks, as well as you have not only the hierarchy, but also,
you can compose hierarchies and relationships. So you have hierarchical graph, where, let's say, for chairs, you have different level
hierarchy for bases, for seats, for backs. And the bases may have different legs. But then also, the legs themselves are related.
The left leg of the chair and the right leg of the chair, they are supposed to be symmetric. And they should have the identical shape.
There are constraints on where these legs are. They have to be really aligned, otherwise the chair is going to fall.
So there are all these constraints that are pretty useful. And how can we represent them? And people come up with all these different representations.
And for each of them, there are also a lot of neural networks, deep learning methods designed
to learn and to capture and to generate objects that satisfy all these constraints. For example, you can see, this is a hierarchical graph,
encoders and decoders that try to represent and generate 3D chairs that satisfy all these constraints while maintaining
their hierarchies. I think this is also from Leonidas's group, from 2019.
And sometimes, we can even represent shapes using some form of programs because there's repetitions and for loops
and how this can be incorporated into using neural networks to generate programs that synthesize object shapes and synthesize their relations
between these object parts. And that's also an important topic. And most recently, I would say, let me end this by saying,
I think there has been a new trend just in the past one year or two that the deep networks or large language
models are doing so well, and they understand things so well that people are exploring.
Is it possible for us to just use large language models, like GPT, to output these programs
because they understand semantics and what the chair should be like? What are the constraints of chairs to satisfy? So is it possible for me to use a large language model
to output programs? But then maybe I can use some implicit functions, or whatever, to capture the specific geometric
details of the parts of the objects, like the chairs. So there's some kind of new emerging trend of research
that is happening right now in these days. OK, I think that's all I have. Thank you.


Thank you everyone for coming. We have another guest lecture. And today we have Ranjay Krishna.
Ranjay Krishna is an assistant professor at the School of Computer Science and Engineering at the University of Washington, and he co-directs the RAIVN lab.
He has taught previous iterations of CS231N in 2020 and 2021, and his research
lies at the intersection of computer vision, natural language processing, robotics, and human computer
interaction. In today's lecture, he will discuss multimodal foundation models. And. Ranjay, the floor is yours.
Thank you. It's great to be back. The first time I ever taught this course here at Stanford it was 2020 and we had about three weeks
where we had to take all the material and move it online. Yeah, every year after that has been much easier to teach.
It's great to be back. So today, we're going to talk about multimodal foundation models. So a lot of the lectures in this class
so far has really been focused on building individual models for individual tasks.
So these usually follow a few steps that you've seen over and over again in lectures. You collect a data set, usually a training
set as well as a test set, then you train a very specialized model for that purpose. So that could be an image classification model or image
captioning model, like the ones you've seen in your assignments as well. And then you finally evaluate those models on your test set.
Now, what's been different in the field so far in the last couple of years is this shift away from these individual models
into building these more foundation models. And the way to think about foundation models
is that it really is trying to pre-train models on a wide variety of skills, a wide variety of different tasks,
and then later on adapt those things for individual tasks depending on your needs. So, for example, one very common foundation model
that you all probably use in some form or the other is GPT, and GPT was trained on a lot of Common Crawl data
from the internet. And then you take that model that you get, and then you fine tune it for different purposes. So you fine tune that model for math problems
or symbolic reasoning or trivia questions. And all of these are individual tasks that this model can quickly adapt to.
Now, what's nice about foundation models is that it allows you to do that update step, that adaptation to new tasks
with very minimal data, meaning you don't need to collect a large amount of training data. You can usually get away with very, very little.
Oftentimes, you can even get away with collecting no training data at all. And so when you think about foundation models,
there's many different classes of foundation models that you might care about. In language, you've got ELMo and BERT that really
started this entire revolution. And then we now have GPT and T5 and variants of these models.
These are things we're not going to talk about in this class, since we're mostly going to be talking about multimodal models.
What we will talk about is how do you build these same foundation models for image classification.
And we'll go into examples like CLIP and CoCa today. We'll also talk about how do you combine language models that you
might have seen already in class with these vision foundation models to enable all new models, multimodal foundation
models that can solve a wide variety of tasks. And then, of course, we can do a lot more than just
solve tasks in language. We'll talk about how you can build models that can output not just text, but also masks
or images that you might want to generate. And then finally, we'll talk about this idea of chaining,
where you take a bunch of foundation models and then combine them to do all new things together.
Now, when we talk about foundation models, there's many different ways to classify them. And it's hard because the definition is often
disagreed upon. But what you typically will see in a foundation model is that it's robust and general to many different tasks.
So you can apply that same model for all different use cases, and I'll show you a ton of use cases today.
Also, something else that's common in a lot of these foundation models is that they have a lot of parameters.
They have large numbers of amounts of parameters, large amounts of training data, and usually they're
trained with some self-supervised objective. So of course, we're not going to talk about the language stuff,
but we will talk about are the ones in green today. And so let's get started with image classification.
So how do we actually go about building a foundation model that can solve image classification for any data
set you might care about. Now, if you remember from a few lectures ago, we were talking about self-supervised learning.
And in self-supervised learning, one of those methods that you saw was SimCLR, where you have this contrastive objective that
contrasts against dissimilar images and pulls closer representations of the same image that
has been transformed in some way or the other. Now, this idea you can think of as pulling together
similar concepts. So different augmentations of a cat should result in representations that are similar to one another,
but it should push away representations for other kinds of categories, like dogs, for example.
Now, the hope with training with these self-supervised learning objectives is that these representations become general
enough so that when you see something new, maybe a sketch of a cat or a sketch of a dog, it's still
embeds those in the space so that it's easy to classify exactly what those concepts are.
Now, moving on to multimodal. We can take these same ideas, the same objective, and then start thinking about what would happen if we added text
to that representation space. So, for example, if we could also embed a representation of the text that says a cute fluffy cat
and have that be close to the cat representations, that would be great, because now we can query things in both images as well as text.
And similarly, if we can also embed the phrase my favorite dog is a golden retriever
and ideally that representation would lie closer to golden retrievers than other kinds of dogs.
So that's the general idea behind adapting the self-supervised learning objectives we've been talking about in class so far to incorporate text
and other multimodal inputs. So in SimCLR, if you remember, the main objective
was that you want to pull together again, transformations of the same image.
So the cat should be closest to its other cat augmentation. So that green arrow right there indicates two things
that should be pulled together. And it should be further away from all the other augmentations. So any other image of a dog or a monkey,
you want those representations to be far away. Now we can use that same idea and now
think about training a CLIP model. In CLIP what they do is they still have that same image
encoder that you have on the left-hand side, but on the right-hand side, you now have a text encoder.
And this text encoder is embedding descriptions of those individual images. So your dog image will now hopefully learn
that it should be closer to a representation of a text that says, my favorite dog is a golden retriever and far away from all the other representations.
And because this is the same formulation that you've seen with SimCLR, the objective that you use to train a model like this
is just by collecting a lot of image text pairs. And then once you have those pairs, feed them into a model in a mini-batch,
and then make sure that you have this contrastive objective that we use for SimCLR. But now we're applying them across images and text.
So we're pulling together, here in the numerator, the representations of similar things and pulling apart the representations
in the denominator for everything else. Now, of course, we want that image to be closest to its corresponding text
and far away from all the other text. But we also want the inverse to be true as well. So we have a second objective as well
that says every text should be closest to its image and further away from all the other image descriptions.
So it's a complimentary symmetric loss that you have between the two different types of modalities
that you're feeding into this learning objective. So of course, what's really nice about a CLIP
like model is that it can be trained with just associations of images and text.
And there's a ton of this data on the internet. So you have a lot of data of corresponding images and text
that you can pull up from the internet. You can download, and now you can train this model at a very, very large scale.
And this is exactly what OpenAI did a couple of years ago in 2021 when they released their CLIP model.
So they collected a lot of that data, and then they trained it using this contrastive objective, using all of the images and text pairs
that they found from the internet. And then once they were done training that, you follow the same 2-step pipeline that you saw
in the self-supervised learning class, where in step 1 you do that pre-training, and then in step 2 you can take that image encoder,
and now you can adapt it to a new task. So once you have this pre-trained image encoder,
you take it, you take its weights, and then you tag on an additional linear layer on top to adapt it to an image classification
task or a detection task or you can put in something like a decoder and decode out
semantic segmentation maps. So a ton of different tasks become possible just by initializing your model from this pre-trained objective.
What was really exciting when this paper came out is that linear addition of this one linear classifier
on top of this CLIP encoder led to really large improvements in performance. So here in this graph, I'm showing you
average performance across many different image classification data sets. And the CLIP models, the ones in red,
they're all the way at the top. And you can see that as you train on more and more images,
you end up getting better and better performance. So it was very exciting because it seemed to indicate that there's this really
nice pre-training objective that we've been able to unlock, and there's an abundance of image text
data on the internet, which means that we can train these to be very, very large and very, very performant.
Of course, that's not the end of the story. What we want to do, ideally, is not to have to adapt these features for something new.
We would ideally want to be able to use a CLIP model out of the box. So in language models, for example, you train a model
to autocomplete, usually. And this autocompletion works like this. You have a phrase that says I love
and then your model fills in the next word, for example, cake. And then you train with this pre-training objective.
And what you want to do during the second stage is to basically take that same model and adapt it to a new task.
For language models, you never have to retrain that model. You never have to retrain it on a new downstream task.
Every task is a language task, and so every task can be treated as this autocomplete process.
But with CLIP, the problem is there is no autocomplete process. So we've trained this model on this contrastive objective,
but to adapt it to a new task we still need training data, and we still need a linear layer on top
that we need to train to adapt it to new tasks. So a lot of people started thinking about what we can do to adapt this model to use it directly
out of the box. And there's this clever trick that people came up with. And this clever trick is basically using the text encoder
as a way of guiding the model to generalize to any downstream classification task.
And it works like this. So let's say you want to classify what this image is using a CLIP model but you don't want to retrain this model
or adapt it for any downstream task. What you can do is you can take the text encoder
and pass in a word through that text encoder to create a text vector and use nearest neighbors to figure out
what is the right classification. So the way this works is you take all the categories in your new data set.
So for example, let's say your new data set contains the categories plain, dog and bird.
You're going to embed all of them in the text space to get a vector for plain, a vector for dog,
and a vector for bird. And now when a new image comes in, all you have to do is embed that image using the image encoder
and then find the closest neighbor. So in this case, you should find that this image has the highest similarity with the correct class.
In this case, it should be the dog vector. And you can see the dog vector does have the highest similarity
score. And so because of that, you can now classify that image as a dog.
Now, you can think of this entire process as essentially building a one neighbor algorithm.
So you have a bunch of centers that you've or embeddings that you've generated in the tech space
and now you can use them as your class category labels, and you're doing one nearest neighbor to find the optimal classification for any new image
that comes in. Now, of course, a single word might not
be sufficient to get a really good word vector. Instead, what you might want to do is use a phrase.
And the reason you might want to do this is because a lot of the internet data, it usually doesn't have words that occur by themselves.
CLIP was trained from just phrases that were downloaded from the internet. And so ideally, you want to pick the right phrase that gives you
the best representation. So instead of just having the categories playing dog and bird,
you might instead want to embed a vector that represents a photo of a plane, a photo of a dog.
And turns out if you do this one small change, you suddenly get a large boost on ImageNet, where you see
an improvement of about 1.3%. Of course, picking that right phrase is also something that's very difficult to do.
And so what people typically do is they don't just pick a single phrase, they pick many different phrases. So a photo of a dog, a drawing of a dog
or a bunch of different ideas for different phrases, and you want to create many different vectors
for all of those different phrases you might think of. And at the end, what you do is you just take the mean vector
representation across all of your phrases for each category and use that as your mean dog vector, your mean plane
vector, and your mean vector. And then now you're back to where you started, and you can do your same one nearest neighbor algorithm
on this. It probably has been trained on ImageNet. This is, I think, a point to show that you
can adapt it to a new task. But I will show you other examples of data sets where it's definitely not been trained on,
and it does adapt to that as well. So you get a single vector out and it
depends on the architecture you're using. If you're using ResNet, you take the final vector representation.
If your text encoder is, let's say, a VIT or a transformer, then you usually take the CLS token of your transformer.
So that's it for CLIP. You can basically adapt this for a wide variety of new image
classification tasks. And to your question right now, of course, it's not that big a deal that it performs just as
well on ImageNet, but it is still exciting that it does do well on ImageNet at all.
I think more interesting is that when you look at other data sets, data sets that were collected after CLIP came out.
So data set like ObjectNet which contains objects that people took photos of in very weird places.
So they put a banana on the ground and took a photo of it, or they took a banana that was really rotten and took a photo of it.
So things that are just not common. And so in this data set, if you train on ImageNet,
you don't do very well because ImageNet again, contains most of these categories in its most typical form.
But if you take the CLIP model, it performs just as well. And that was really, really exciting for many people
because this ability to generalize to a completely new data set that it hasn't seen before, that's even out of domain to some degree,
was really great. So why do you think this is? Why do you think CLIP generalizes a lot better than training on ImageNet?
To paraphrase your response, because I think it's the right response, is the text
that you download from the internet, it contains a lot more than the category labels. It contains a lot more structural information,
contains information about shape, about the colors of things and all of that adds to the representations.
And so these models are able to adapt a lot better to something that maybe is slightly out of distribution or an object that
looks slightly different because it does have all these other things it's looking for as well. And so those that additional supervision really
helps quite a lot. The other reason it helps quite a lot is the scale of data. ImageNet is only about 1.3 million images or so,
whereas the internet contains millions and billions. At this point, billions of image text pairs that we can download very easily.
And so these models have just seen so much more data that this adaptation becomes a lot easier.
And so people started doing these experiments on a wide variety of generalization tasks. So they showed that you can generalize these models
for not just natural images but also sketches that you can also do this on adversarial data sets as well.
And performance across the board seem to indicate that these models are just really, really good and robust to many different applications.
And then here I'm showing you the difference between zero shot and linear probe. And you can see that, of course, linear probe, when
you add that additional linear classifier and train it and adapt it a little bit, it does improve performance in majority
of the data sets, the ones in green but it's not always the case. In some cases, the CLIP zero shot
just performs really well out of the box. And so it just seemed to indicate that we finally
unlocked this capability of being able to adapt image encoders for a wide variety
of different downstream tasks. And this is why I think a lot of people talk about CLIP as the first foundation model for images.
So let's talk about what makes CLIP work so well. Of course, there's no real labels as such with CLIP.
We're just downloading any text associated with images. What makes CLIP work so well is what
I was saying it contained when it was first trained, it was trained on about somewhere between--
well, the parameters were just gigantic. They sort of scaled up the model and they changed the architecture from ResNet to a VIT.
And so you had this transformer architecture with 307 million parameters that was used to train this model.
And the second thing that helped was the amount of data. So instead of just 1.2 million images from ImageNet,
you suddenly had about 400 million image text pairs from the internet that they downloaded and used that to train.
So that scale, both in terms of model size as well as the amount of data, helped improve performance
quite a lot. So immediately after CLIP came out, people started experimenting with this objective.
And there's many different variants of a CLIP that have come out over the years. But one in particular that's really stood out, came out
in 2022, it's called CoCa. And CoCa took the CLIP model. Here, you can see it's the same objective here.
You've got the image being encoded on one side. You've got the text being encoded on one side. And then you have that contrastive loss
between the two. But they added one additional thing. They added a decoder as well that
took the image features from the image encoder. And then they fed it in through cross-attention
and captioned that image. And it turns out this captioning process also helps the model learn quite a lot of rich information.
So the general motivation here is that it's not sufficient to just be able to say that this is an image of a cat versus a dog,
but to describe that image in text requires a lot more information to be learned by the model.
And so it's-- the hypothesis is that it's a stronger learning objective. And so because of that, it learns better features.
And we found that to be true overall. When you compare CoCa to CLIP, its performance
improves quite a lot across all the different ImageNet variants. And overall, there's a 10% boost in performance
across all of the data sets. And I think this is the first time where these foundation
models actually beat all the models that we had trained from supervised learning.
So at this point, we had many different models that people were putting out onto online leaderboards.
And in those leaderboards across the years, you can see the trend going upwards
as models are performing better and better. And this is, I think, the turning point where people abandoned supervised learning objectives
for image encoders and instead focus solely on just pre-training objectives using these self-supervised learning methods from the internet data.
So let's talk about some advantages of CLIP. CLIP's got a lot of really fun things that you can do with it. It's super easy to train because it's just simple contrastive
learning objective. It's also really fast in terms of inference. You can embed your entire data set into some representation,
and then all you have to do to classify is just do retrieval on that embedded data set.
So you can retrieve things very easily with CLIP's representations, which makes it really useful for not just classification
tasks but also search and retrieval tasks as well. Another thing that people really liked about CLIP
is that it's open vocabulary. You can feed in any text description, and it should be able to retrieve the right images for you.
And so that also allows for its applicability across many different domains.
And of course, we're going to talk about this later. CLIP is really amenable to being chained with other models.
And this idea of chaining started becoming really popular. But hold off on that. We'll talk about that in a few minutes.
Of course, I'm telling you all the good things. Turns out there's a lot of bad as well. CLIP unfortunately can distinguish
between these two images. So you have an image of a mug in grass and you have some grass in some mug
and CLIP just does not know the difference between these two things.
The reason it doesn't know is because the CLIP's learning objective really depends on its batch size.
If your batch size is not large enough, then all of the other batch elements are unlikely to provide any useful supervision
for the model. If you're always comparing a cat versus a truck, you're not really going to learn a representation for a cat.
Instead, what you get is some representation that's OK at some high level, but if you increase the batch size,
you're more likely to encounter other animals that are similar to the cat, and then you learn a much better representation.
And then, of course, if you increase your batch size to let's say 32,000 and you train it across many, many GPUs,
then suddenly you start learning really good representations. You can actually start identifying a Welsh Corgi versus another Corgi.
And this only is possible when you have gigantic batch sizes, because it requires you to have other negative examples
in your batch that are close enough, that are hard negatives that forces the model to have to learn.
So that's very important for getting these models to work well. But unfortunately, regardless of how much
people have tried, increasing the batch size doesn't guarantee that the model will learn a good representation
for things. And so you're at the mercy of the randomness of your training data.
So increasing the batch size does help with some amount of fine-grained concepts. But of course, it's still limited.
And training on 32,000 amounts of batch size is just too large
for most labs to even consider doing. People have identified this error
across many different benchmarks and identify that CLIP just doesn't have this notion of compositionality.
So this idea that the mug and the grass versus grass in the mug. It's really about composing different concepts,
like the mug and the grass, and the relationship in all of those individual components
are not composed well in your CLIP representations. And there's been a ton of different benchmarks
like Winoground or CREPE or ARO. And a lot of these benchmarks have actually come from my lab.
They just keep finding over and over again that CLIP has a ton of limitations, and there's a ton of things
that they are just unable to do. Now, of course, in reaction, the community immediately started thinking about how do I handcraft my batch so that it
contains the hard negatives, so if I have one type of corgi that I should hopefully have another type of corgi in there.
So your model really is forced to learn good representations. And so this idea of training with hard negatives
became really popular in the community for a whole one year, until we released a follow-up paper that
said that if you train with hard negatives, you end up actually unlearning a lot of things about semantics.
For whatever reason, and this is something that we still don't theoretically understand, we end up actually with much worse performance
in generalization across different environments and different kind of data sets.
So there's a lot of work to be done still in terms of figuring out the right way of constructing
your data set, the right way of constructing your batches and training signal. So we're still really far away from that.
But regardless, people are still very excited about CLIP in general because it does give you some amount of supervision
regardless. Of course, again, image level captions are again, not enough.
Ideally, what we want is more than just that. We want to be able to identify not just that there's a person crossing the street, but that the person is
in this location, the car is here, the street is here. All of that information, that grounding information
is completely missing in CLIP. And so ideally, you'd want also your data set to contain this kind of information
and your model to also be able to reason about that kind of information. Also, the final thing that's a big disadvantage for CLIP
is that regardless of how big your data set is, even if you collect upwards of, let's say, 5 billion images,
it's still not going to be enough to capture all of the important things that you might care about.
And so there's been a lot of efforts that we've been doing in data filtering. So how do you filter the internet to find the best training data for training these CLIP models?
I won't go into that today, but there are all of these mechanisms that people are exploring that's now
become the frontier of what today's research looks like in this field. OK, so that's the first branch of foundation models
we talked about. It's about generalizing classification to a whole host of tasks. Now, let's talk about vision and language models.
So there's a new class of foundation models, which has become popular in the last 2, 2 and 1/2 years,
and we often refer to them as multi-modal language models. And I'll start off with this discussion
by focusing on LLaVA, which is arguably one of the first of multi-modal language models
that became very, very popular. The motivation here is that language models, which do this next token prediction, this autocomplete process,
that process is really useful for adapting to a lot of new tasks. And so can we start thinking about even image models as well,
doing the same thing? Can we give it an image also start doing different kinds of reasoning that's
similar to this autoregressive process? And that gave rise to this class of models called vision language
models or multimodal models. But of course, this just to be historically correct,
this idea wasn't completely new in 2022. In 2019, ViLBERT actually introduced this idea.
There's a paper called ViLBERT in 2019 that took these image models and language models
and put them all together to accomplish a generalization across different tasks, but they were all
trained pre-transformers and also mostly use LSTMs instead.
And so the rebirth of all of this is what's happening right now with LLaVA, where
a lot of these models switched over to a better architecture, switched over to a better set of objectives,
and now aren't just training on individual tasks, but are training on a foundation of a variety of different tasks,
using some pre-training objective from the internet. So how does this work? How do you think about LLaVA?
So to talk about LLaVA, let's take a step back and think about the transformer model or self-attention
in particular. So when we think about language models, what they're doing is they're attending over the past.
So you have a sequence of words that are coming in. So for example, cats are so and then your model to generate the next word,
will attend over that historical context and then generate what it thinks the next word should be.
So it might think that the phrase should be cats are so cute. And here's another way of representing
that same objective. You've got the input text coming in at the bottom, and your model will generate the next word, which is cute.
So when we think about vision language models, what people usually are referring to is adding in additional context
by grounding that conversation that we're having with some image that we care about.
So we might care about tokenizing our image somehow and feeding those tokens into our language model
along with the historical context of cats or so, and then using that to autocomplete
the rest of the description. So that's the basic idea behind LLaVA is feed in these image tokens, along with the words that
are being generated to continuously generate more words about that image. So of course, a question comes in,
which is how do you define these tokens? What should these tokens be in the first place? And LLaVA, their solution was to use the CLIP image encoder.
So they took the CLIP model, they took the image encoder and then they basically extracted tokens
from that encoder. So the first thing you might think about doing is just using the CLS token.
So here you've got-- let me see if my mouse works here. Oh, it does. So you've got the image coming in over here
and then they're getting patched. Each patch turns into a representation that's fed into your transformer architecture in CLIP.
It goes through a bunch of layers of processing. And then at the end, you get a bunch of different tokens for each of the patches, along with a representation
for the CLS token. And so far, we've only been considering the CLS token. We've only been doing things with the CLS token
for doing any sort of classification task. But there are all of these other tokens in there as well.
Now, the problem with these other tokens is that they're never supervised. So the CLS token is supervised with this contrastive objective
with text, but the other tokens are never used for any purpose. So they might not actually contain any useful information.
And empirically, people have shown that these features are not very useful, but what they have shown
is that if you go one more layer back, the penultimate layer in your CLIP encoder, these features are actually
very useful. So these features are used to generate the final CLIP embedding in the final layer.
And they contain a lot of spatial information about where objects are in your entire image.
And so this is what people typically use when combining CLIP encoder with a transformer LLM-based
model. So this is what the entire LLaVA architecture looks like. You feed an image through your CLIP--
pretrained CLIP encoder, you extract a bunch of features from it, you take those features
and you pass it through a linear layer that you need to train. And what this linear layer will train to do
is convert your CLIP representations into something that the LLM can understand and make sense of.
And once you have these tokens, you now basically pass in all of your tokens to your language model.
And it can now generate conversations about that image itself.
So LLaVA was one of the very first popular models that were out there. And following up, Google quickly released Flamingo,
and in Flamingo, it followed very much the entire LLaVA setup of being able to combine a vision encoders
features with a large language model, but the place where they innovated is how do you do that fusing of these different features.
So in LLaVA, you had the features coming in through a linear layer and fed in as part of the input.
In Flamingo, what they did instead was they basically took all the features coming out of your vision encoder and fed them
into every layer of your LLM. OK. So they had made some-- they had to make some changes to the LLM
architecture itself. And this is how they made those changes. So here's an example of what Flamingo's training
data looks like. You've got images that are encoded. So you got this dog and you've got this cat,
they both get embedded. And they're both going to be fed into every single layer of your LLM.
And down here you've got a data that's of describing every single starts with the image
and describes that image, then the next image describes the next image, and so on and so forth.
And they're sort of fed in as input to your LLM. And your output is going to be to autocomplete that last image.
So you've got one image, followed by a description of the dog, second image and you start the description and your model
will be trained on auto completing that description for that second image. So what do they do?
What do they change to the model itself? They added this GATED X cross-attention attention module
to every single layer of your LLM. And they made one other change. They also added this perceiver sampler
right here that basically samples and downsamples your image representations.
So they're smaller dimensions and a fixed number of tokens for every single layer. So let me go into some details with what they look like.
So this is the full architecture, overall. Most of the components are frozen, all the language model weights are frozen,
all the vision model parts are frozen. The only parts that are trained are these perceiver sampler components
and this cross-attention layer that added into every single layer of your LLM.
So let's talk about what this cross-attention module looks like. This is me zooming into that cross-attention module.
So every single LLM layer, right before the LLM layer, you have this cross-attention component.
And what its purpose is to look at the image features and then decide what parts of the image
features it wants to keep around, and what it thinks would be useful for the language model to know about.
And they designed it as a set of components that you've already seen so far.
So you attend over the image features using a cross-attention layer and then following
that cross-attention, they added this tanh nonlinear activation. And this is basically deciding what parts of these components
do I want to keep around, which ones or which parts of the image do I want to forget.
And then it goes through this fully connected layer, where it adapts those representations a little bit,
and then again a tanh nonlinearity to decide again which parts it should keep and which parts it shouldn't.
Once it goes through those two components and each one has a residual connection across [INAUDIBLE]
it then goes to your normal language model processing and then continues to generate the word it needs to.
So there's additional layers are being added just as a way for the language to incorporate and attend
over the visual features at every single layer. OK. So the actual modification itself, if you're interested in what this looks like in code,
is just about two or three lines of code, where they added this cross-attention layer and then
this tanh non-linearity in between. And that's really about it. So in terms of code, it's a very minimal change.
Although for the model, it's a very gigantic change because now it can choose what parts of the image to attend to at every single layer of its processing.
So you give the model a lot of ability to decide when and how to attend over the vision features.
OK. So Flamingo was very, very exciting, but training it was very difficult.
And they had this really ingenious way of training it that allowed our models to adapt to many different tasks.
The way they trained it was through this concatenation of a bunch of different images together.
So you didn't just have one image and one description. You had a description at the beginning that says, here
are some cute pictures of my pets and a sentence beginning of image, and then a description of that first image
and of that first component, and then the second image and a description of the second image.
So you had the training set up so that it looks like a long sequence of image text-- image
text interleaved data. And of course, when describing any single image, you don't want the model to look at the entire context.
You want it to only look at that one particular image. And so they created a masking scheme, where every single image when generating only
looks at that particular image features and not the other ones. Meaning that when you're generating the description for my puppy is sitting in the grass,
you're only looking at the features that correspond to the puppy, only when generating those words.
Similarly, when generating the description for the cat, you're only looking at the cat image and not the other image.
So there is this of distinction where they created this handcrafted masking
seam to make sure your descriptions are always following and looking at only that particular image.
But when trained, the model does get to see the entire context of everything that it's generating.
So why is that helpful? Why is this entire process helpful of being able to see all of this stuff together?
Well, it's helpful because it allows you to do these kinds of applications. So here are three different applications that Flamingo
was able to showcase. And they all center around having multiple conversations
or dealing with multiple images. So in the first case, you've got an image that's fed in
and the flamingo model describes the image by saying that this is a picture of two teddy bears on the moon.
And then what it allows people to do is then ask another question so people can ask, what are they doing.
And because it's already being-- it's training using an existing large language
model, that large language models reasoning capabilities are inherited and now we can reason and answer
this particular question. It can now answer and say the teddy bears are having a conversation. And then a user might ask, what objects are they using.
And again, Flamingo can say that it looks like it's a computer, and so on and so forth. So you can enable this multi-turn dialogue
about an image simply by doing two things. You train by first pre-training the language model
and then incorporating the language model into Flamingo. And secondly, allowing your model to see many different images and many different
turns throughout its training data so it can adapt to longer sequences of text.
You can also give it multiple images and ask, what is a common thing about these images. And now the Flamingo model will look
at each of those different components and reason and say that they're all Flamingos. So you can start doing a lot of these really cool applications.
People also showed that you can start doing in-context learning. I don't know if this is something you've seen already
with language models, but I'm sure you've used in-context learning with GPT, where you tell GPT here's
an example of what I want, give me more things like this. And you can do the same thing with Flamingo,
where you can pass in an image and a description, an image and a description. And now when you pass in a new image,
it'll give you a description. Or you can say, here's some image,
here's a question and answer. Here's an image question and answer. And then when you pass in a new image and just ask the question,
it'll give you the answer. So you're not training it to do these different kinds of tasks, but you're providing it with examples of behaviors
that it should have, and it should just generalize to new kinds of behaviors that you might care about.
Similarly, you might care about just classification. And you can use Flamingo to do classification as well.
So you can give it an image and say this is underground, this is Congress. And then you can ask, what is this.
And you can also even teach it to do OCR and math, where you give it an image and say, oh, this should correspond
to 2 plus 1 equals 3. And so eventually, when you give it a new image, it should be able to autocomplete and extract out
3 times 6 and then also give you the output by reasoning through this entire process.
Yeah. So this would be an example of few shot learning where you give it some examples, a few examples of things,
and then you ask it what the new thing should be. If I were to throw away all the in-context examples,
that would be zero shot learning. So we're not concatenating them. We're technically passing the image tokens
through this perceiver sampler into every single layer of your LLM instead. And so only the text is ever concatenated and fed as input
to your Flamingo model and it chooses when to attend to which parts of the image.
You give it to it once. But behind the scenes, of course, this is the interface-- the web interface.
But behind the scenes, what they actually do is they cache the model, assuming that the user will want to continue talking.
And so the model is cached and ready to accept more tokens. Yeah, but if they did not cache it then yes,
it would pass in this entire conversation as input. Yeah.
OK. So Flamingo was super cool because they have these really big tables in their paper that you can go check out.
But what was really cool about it is there were all of these tasks that were very difficult, and you had to adapt CLIP to do them.
But Flamingo was just able to do it with zero shot or few shot. And you start seeing these gigantic improvements
across many different benchmarks. And this is when, I think, the field shifted from reporting on a few classification benchmarks
to reporting on any understanding task at all. As long as you can frame it as a question answering process,
you can build benchmarks for a wide variety of skills, and we started seeing that become the norm in the last two
years in the computer vision field. So this is where we were, I think, sometime last year
and seeing the success of LLaVA, a lot of companies started investing quite heavily on these models.
And so you start seeing a lot of API models like GPT-40 GPT-4V, Gemini 1.5 Pro, Gemini 1.5 Flash.
A lot of these models started being released, and even Anthropic came into the picture with Claude 3 Opus.
And now of course, Claude 4 Opus is out. And so you had a lot of these models come out,
and they were performing a lot better on a bunch of these benchmarks. So here I'm showing you the average performance across 11
of the more popular visual understanding benchmarks in the field. And there's this gigantic difference.
So the difference between LLaVA, the model we talked about that's open source, that's down here at about 43% accuracy on average.
Meanwhile GPT and all of these other models are performing much, much better at about somewhere like 80 or high 70s.
So a big difference in performance between these two different kinds of models. Of course, immediately seeing this difference,
people started distilling GPT and Gemini into distilled variants and trying to release those models.
So Alibaba, which is a company in China, they released this model called QWEN. And then there's Intern VL, there's Phi.
There's all of these different models that start coming out. And all of them were distilled from GPT.
And if not GPT, then Gemini. Now that led to a big problem in the field,
a problem that's become a big part of what my own research agenda has been trying to focus on, which is we
don't actually know as a research community how to build really performant vision language models.
The tricks behind how to build them, they only the people in OpenAI and Gemini
in Google, those teams know how to build these kinds of models. But the open source community, they're down here.
They're down here. This is where the research community was as of last year. Of course, you can argue these are really nice open models,
but they're not really open. Because they're distilled, we don't actually know how to reproduce these models.
We can only produce them. But if GPT exists. But if GPT doesn't exist, we don't know how
to create these other models. And so when my own research agenda has been focused on over the last couple of years,
is figuring out how do you close this gap, how do you build really good multi-modal language models
and disseminate that understanding to the entire community. And so what we've done over the last six months or about a year
now, is we've created our own a class of models that we called Molmo.
And I'm showing you Molmo's performance up at the top. And what sets Molmo apart from all the other models out
there is that it's completely open source, meaning it's open weights. So you can download the model.
It's open data, meaning you can download the training set as well as the evaluation set. It's also open code, meaning you can basically
train your own Molmo in your own home, assuming you have enough GPUs, and you can also
evaluate, add on new evaluations, adapt this model for all kinds of new things, and of course,
start using it for a wide variety of different contexts. Now, of course, academic benchmarks are not enough.
Because what we care about at the end of the day is are people going to use these models? Will people want to use these models over GPT?
And so to make sure we had that evaluation properly done, we released a playground with Molmo,
and we did a gigantic user study, where we actually compared head to head outputs from our models versus outputs from all the other models.
And our model has the same Elo rating as GPT. It comes in second with a difference of 1 in Elo
rating versus GPT-40. This is that same graph rotated so that I can show you some examples.
This was a gigantic evaluation by the way. This is about 870 users that we showed these model outputs to.
And we did about 325,000 pairwise comparisons, where we asked people which models output do you prefer.
Our model, the Moima model, ranked again, like I said, second, more or less a coin flip between what people preferred
between GPT and our model. But it already beat out Gemini 1.5 Pro and Claude 3.5.
Now, the big difference is we are a small research lab, and we're beating out Google's billions of dollars
of investment into Gemini, as well as Anthropic's billions of dollars of investment and already matching GPT.
And so we were quite excited by this entire process. But we also developed a 7-billion model that comes
in right after those big models. And that 7- billion model is really exciting because you can put it on a single GPU.
So you can now have this model capable of doing a wide variety of vision tasks that works on a single GPU, meaning a lot of people
can now use it and fine tune it for all kinds of things. We released this model in September 25
and the community was very excited by it. This is the first time a very performant, multimodal vision
language model was released, and a ton of people started talking and writing articles about all the ways they
want to use it. One of the use cases that kept popping up over and over again was this idea of using Molmo finally
for robotics applications. And I won't talk about robotics today because you're going to learn about it in the next class.
But I do want to give you some examples of things that people were excited about with robotics.
But a ton of people, even folks at NVIDIA, started chatting about how this should never
bet against open source, regardless of how much model development you do in private. Eventually, the open source community will catch up,
and we were catching up at that point. And so seeing our model out, Meta quickly released
in response, their LLaVA 3.2 model and a lot of people did evaluations comparing Molmo versus Meta's LLaVA model.
And again, I'm very happy that we came up on top of LLaVA as well. So let me show you why Molmo does so well.
What was the trick to getting these models to work very well? The trick was to ground its decision
making in the pixels itself. So usually, when you give a model a question like count
how many boats there are, it'll give you some number and oftentimes, it hallucinates. But what sort of sets our model apart
is that it actually points to all the things that it's counting. So it generates points to all the boats
and then it outputs a final number. So it's decision making is grounded in the pixels itself.
And this allowed us to essentially train a model that unlike LLaVA for Meta that was trained on about six billion
image taxpayers, our model was trained on only 700,000 image text pairs.
The big difference was that we hand-curated the 700,000 image text pairs, and that was the biggest difference between what
we were able to do versus what these models that these companies were building were doing.
So a lot of folks are trying to currently download these image text pairs from the internet.
That's been the foundation of how a lot of people train these vision language models. You collect a lot of internet data of images
with their associated text. But the problem with internet data is that it's incidental. The text that's often associated with an image
describes something subjective or something that the uploader felt about the image. It rarely actually talks about the contents
of the image itself. And meanwhile, this is what our data looks like. So for a single image, we have a dense description
of the actual contents of that image. And we have things that people never talk about on the internet.
There's a ton of tasks and knowledge about the visual world that we just never speak about. I will never tell you that something
is to the left of something else, just because it's unnatural for us to do that. It's just so obvious that something
is to the left of something. Why would you ever communicate that information? So that's the kind of information we started eliciting from people.
We started talking about-- we started getting people to talk about how things have particular size like large or shaped like rectangular.
We talked about material like polished and rich and its positioning across the image, like it spans the horizontal plane of the image.
So all of this information really is what makes these models more performant. Here's another example from the data set.
Here's a very simple image of a phone screen or a tablet screen. And we have information here that again is completely missing
from the internet, things that people would find helpful. Things like this is a tablet device. The time is this, the amount of power left in your device
is this. This is the kind of information that would help people use these models. But this is, again, the kind of information
we never talk about on the internet. And so to get this kind of information, we designed a lot of different questions.
We spent two years doing different kinds of elicitation studies to figure out what are the right things
or pieces of information that are missing from the internet, and how do we elicit them as effectively as possible.
One thing that was very important is we had all of our annotators not type descriptions,
but talk about descriptions, talking automatically breaks a lot of stereotypes around [? Gricean ?] maxims.
And so by getting people to talk, we got them to speak about things that they would never usually type.
The model itself didn't look any different from LLaVA. We had the same setup of a CLIP and coding coming in.
You had a connector that was just a linear layer, and then you had a large language model that would take in all of these tokens and then output any thing
that you care about. So the model itself looked very similar to existing models. The biggest difference was in the data
and the quality and density of the data itself. And because of grounding capability,
where the model grounds its decision making in the image itself, you could get Malmo to do things that you can't
do-- you can't use any of the other models to do; things like point to the menu. It actually tells you where that menu item is,
or you can tell it to point to where I can set my search options and it'll show you, OK, this
is where you might want to set those options or point to where the mid-size data sets are, and it'll tell you
what option you need to move. And I already showed you that you can point to count,
but you can also point to do really fine grained things, like being able to ask, what is the route number on this bus?
Molmo doesn't just simply give you an answer, it actually points to where in the image. In this case, there is this area right here
that contains the bus number and then returns the bus number to you. You can ask it to reason about how many cars
on the left versus how many cars are on the right. You can ask it to reason over depth images or overhead images,
or even really crowded scenes and sports areas. What's also really exciting, and again,
we'll talk about this in a few minutes, is this idea of chaining that keeps coming up all across multimodal models today.
The idea of chaining Molmo to other models, what you can do is chain the output of Molmo to become
the input of another model like SAM 2, and so you can tell Molmo to point to the cricket bat.
And now you take that point, you feed it to a model like SAM 2, which does segmentation, and now you
can do segmentation of that cricket bat across time. And so you can start enabling all kinds of new applications.
Here's one that we played around with in the office, which again, you're going to hopefully learn about
in the next lecture with when you hear about robotics. But we asked Molmo to point to where the water bottle is.
And then we moved the robot using simple motion planners to that water bottle. Next, we ask it to go move that water bottle
to where the dirty dishes are. It points to the dish-- to the-- sorry-- sink, and then moves the robot there.
And then we tell it to go point to where the free space is in the sink and put that bottle in that location.
So again, you can combine all of these capabilities together now and chain them to even automate a lot of robotics applications.
This has been a lot of focus in my group now is adapting a lot of these visual language models and enabling a lot of generalization
in the actual physical domain. So the question is around, would these models
be able to point if you were always changing the resolution of the image to be a fixed resolution?
Well, it turns out that you can actually adapt these models to be any resolution nowadays. There are these mechanisms like [INAUDIBLE] that
is introduced a way of allowing for any variable size image input and you can adapt them to point in that new space instead.
So your models position embeddings basically change depending on how big your image size is
and your models-- you typically tend to generalize well. So that was the conversation around adding vision
and multimodal models together. In the last 20 minutes that we have left, I want to talk about generalizing these foundation
models to not just deal with image classification and text, but be able to generalize to any output space
you might care about. And one of those models that's become really popular in this space is this Segment Anything Model.
The Segment Anything Model or SAM, for short, what it tries to do is it tries to build a segmentation model that's
a foundation model for all kinds of segmentation tasks. So really what they're trying to do is allow anybody to point to things that they care about
in the image, and then hopefully have that thing be something that the model can output a mask for.
So for example, you want a model that generalizes beyond just a fixed number of categories
to any category you might care about. And you would ideally want these outputs to be masks for any category that is of interest to the user.
So those are the two goals that we want to generalize to any category, a huge number of categories.
And we ideally want to be able to very specifically output something that the user really cares about.
So they're both challenges. They're both challenges in figuring out how do you collect a large amount of data that spans a wide variety of categories,
as well as how do you design an architecture that really pinpoints what the user really cares about.
Now, let's start with the second question first. It's really ambiguous when we want a mask for something.
So imagine a scenario where you have two cats in an image and a user comes in and says, hey, I
want a segmentation for the cat, but it's really not clear which cat they want a segmentation for.
Ideally, again, if you had more mask pointing capability, you could actually point to which cat you care about. And then depending on the point, you
could create the masks that matter. Now, of course, these are not very good masks.
And ideally, you want these masks to be very, very good at quality that can support a wide variety of downstream applications
like image editing or any kinds of other things you might think of. So to build this architecture that allows any user
to be able to specify exactly what they care about, we need it to go beyond just simply typing
in text what you care about. So what the SAM architecture has is two components or three,
specifically. It's got the image encoder, which is again, it could be a clip encoder.
And it's got a prompt encoder which is something special. This prompt encoder really tries to encode text or points
or bounding boxes or any way that a user might want to specify what they care about. And then given these two things, it
passes it through this really lightweight decoder that outputs a mask. And the decoder looks very similar to the segmentation
decoders that you've already seen in this course. So overall, this is what the model looks like.
Given an image, we encode that image using an image encoder. And then you have a bunch of different prompts
that are going through interacting with these image encoding through a decoder
and you output a mask. So this is the overall architecture design. Now, there's one big thing that is a problem with segmentation.
So let's say a user does point at this particular location and says, hey, I want a segmentation mask for this location.
Now, the problem with that segmentation mask is that it's still ambiguous even with a point, it's still not sufficient because that point
might be referring to the entire scissor. It might only be looking and referring to the parts
that you can hold, or it can be referring to one of the parts that you can hold. So this ambiguity is really difficult to resolve for.
And you don't want to penalize the model for picking the wrong one. So what the SAM architecture does
is instead of outputting one segmentation mask, it actually outputs three segmentation masks at different levels of granularity.
And then it picks the one that is the closest matching to ground truth, and then uses that to calculate the loss and therefore not penalizing
the other ones. So the hope is that overall, over time, this model will learn to output all different kinds of masks
and then the user gets to choose which one is the most appropriate for their use cases.
And if you put all of this together, the only thing you need now is data.
You need a lot of data across many different categories to really make this model possible.
Now, the problem with data is that until this model came out in 2023, this was about a year and a half, maybe two years ago.
When this model came out, most of the segmentation data sets were extremely small. And what the authors of this paper did is that they grew
the amount of segmentation data sets that were out there, the amount of images by about 6x and the number of segmentation
masks by about 400x. So they significantly grew and collected a lot of masks
to make this model as performant as possible. So again, the message is very similar to the message we had with Flamingo, the message we had with Molmo.
And the message is you really, really good, high-quality data to really get these models to be as performant as possible.
And for a lot of vision tasks, the data is completely missing from the internet, and you need to go out and find and collect
that data to get these models to work very well. And so to make this data happen, they
created this in the loop process, where they initially had some amount of data annotated.
From that annotation, they created a training data set, they trained a model, and they used that model to annotate more data.
And then they iteratively refined that model generated segments using users and continued this process.
So they had this human in the loop-- model in the loop process, proposing segments and then
fixing the segments using human annotators. This is what an example image looks like from their data set.
You have quite a lot of categories. Each individual vegetable here is annotated with its own mask.
So they're quite expensive to collect. And they did this across a lot of images, millions of images.
Here's another example where again all the single umbrellas are annotated. Again, here's another one with underwater.
And of course, paintings as well. They have segmentations of paintings. And so all of this together is really
what was foundational to making this foundation model for segmentation, OK.
So that's for Segment Anything. And I want to use the last couple of minutes that I have left today to really focus
on chaining, which is the last part of multimodal language models.
The idea behind chaining is something you've already seen. I've given you hints already throughout this lecture.
And the idea is to be able to combine different models together to enable things that a single model can't do alone.
Here's a fun little exercise we can do as a class. So I'm giving you four images and I'm also
giving you four categories. And these are potentially categories that some of you
have never seen before. And there are also categories that CLIP hasn't seen. And so CLIP actually fails at these categories
because it doesn't have any idea which ones are associated with what. Does anyone here know which one is what?
Marimba, yeah, the second one is marimba. That's right. Yeah there's one that's a little easy. The viaduct.
Yeah, I think a lot of you know which one that is. But, yeah, which one's the dog and which one's the bird?
What if I gave you these instead. So now I'm giving you descriptions of these things,
and it suddenly becomes very easy for you to associate each one with the right category. And that's the basic idea behind chaining
that even if CLIP has never seen these images, chances are these concepts have been talked
about on the internet to some degree, and it's likely that GPT might be able to describe it.
And if GPT can create those descriptions, now those descriptions become really good ways of classifying exactly which category is which one.
And that's the idea behind chaining, is that you take the strengths of one model, and you combine it with the capabilities of another,
and suddenly you get all kinds of new capabilities that you didn't have before. And so you can take a ton of categories that
have no training data in CLIP. But if you can describe all of them, because CLIP has seen a lot of descriptions for things,
it can now start classifying all of them very well. And you can start getting CLIPS to generate classifications
for individual flowers or individual cars or individual spaces or even different kinds of pets.
And you start seeing these improvements on a bunch of different data sets that are about more fine-grained, specialized categories.
And the only way it's able to do that is because GPT has ingested some ability to describe those things.
And this idea of being able to generalize the new capabilities is something that was extremely popular last year,
and it still remains very popular this year. And it's through this idea of chaining
for any question at all. So, for example, if I asked you how many-- are there
three people in the boat? The way you might want to do this is by, again
asking a multimodal language model to answer this question, or what you could do is use all of the hundreds of specialized
vision models that we've been developing over the last few decades. So there are object detection models that you learned about
in class. If you use an object detector, you'd be able to get a detection for each of the three people. And then you could just say, oh, they're
3 people because there are three detections. So that's a general idea, is you can train other models outputs
together so that you can do new capabilities. Here's another example. If I asked you how many total people
there are across these two boats, is it six? And again, you can do the same thing. You can write a program that does object detection on 1 one
and then object detection on image 2, and then adds up all of those components together.
So this is the basic idea behind what we now call chaining.
And this was popularized by a paper that won the Best Paper award last year called VisProg
and in this VisProg paper, the visual programming paper, the idea was that you take any image or any sort of question
and you generate a program. You generate a program that says answer something about image 1,
answer something about image 2, and then combine those answers together to give you the final answer.
So you write a function in Python, and then in that Python function, you have individual calls to other models
that we've already seen in training. So for example, when asking this particular question,
deciding if this statement is true or not, the left and right image contains a total of six people and two boats.
You can ask GPT to actually create a program that tries to answer this question,
and then you can take the answer from its program, OK. And you can also get GPT to do in-context examples, where
you give it examples of programs that you can generate using other functions. And we can see that it generalizes to new questions
and starts using all of the functionality that it has available. Of course, the one thing you need to do
is give it the functions themselves. So you need to tell it that, hey, you have these capabilities from other models that you can use.
You can localize things using an object detector. You can localize faces using a face detector.
And you can have all of these different capabilities across many different other models that people have created.
And you can chain them together to do different kinds of tasks. Yeah, so there's two different ways of doing it.
One is a static way of doing it, where you want to give it as diverse examples as possible and then hopes that it generalizes.
Another one is to dynamically choose, given this question, what are the best in-context examples I
should use? And so you can treat that as another retrieval process, where you retrieve the best examples, and then you
ask it to generate a program. And that tends to perform a lot better, but only if you have a good retrieval system.
Yes, it would require a lot of compute. So there's compute in terms of calling GPT, which
you have to do through an API. And then you have to load each of these individual models into your memory and then run each of them sequentially.
So it could actually be a lot more costly. And so what people are trying to do is figure out, can we distill these capabilities
into a single model? And that's a big part of what research looks like today in 2025.
But of course, people are also still trying to figure out how do you chain these things effectively very well.
Yeah, you can think of it as an agent. Yeah. So you have an agent that's basically deciding, hey, given this question, what are the other models I need help
from and how do I stitch them together to do new capabilities. So that's what it looks like.
Yeah. Here's another example where you might want to do image editing. You might care about replacing the sand the desert
with lush green grass. Of course, image editing models are still in its infancy. And so what you might want to do instead
is call a segmentation model, identify the desert, and then only replace the desert parts, those pixels, with grass,
and then you can composite them together to make a new image. That's all of the things I wanted to talk about in terms
of different capabilities. So you've got here some capabilities
around how to think about foundation models. It really is, at the end of the day,
an ability to train a model for a single task, and then from that single task generalize
to many different downstream applications. And we talked about in classification how you can create these models by just taking a lot of image
text pairs from the internet, training them together to do different kinds of tasks. And that allows you to generalize
to new kinds of data sets that might not even exist in the real world or have any labels for in the real world.
You can also combine them with language models and train them to do in-context examples like captioning
or counting or OCR. And these are again capabilities that enable many different applications.
And then of course, the outputs don't always have to be language or categories. They can also be segmentation masks,
where you can take different kinds of masks depending on different user inputs. And you can generalize this even further by combining many
of these foundation models or even smaller models together through programs and do all kinds of new things.
So hallucinations still happen all across the board. What we're showing is that it seems
like pointing does reduce hallucinations quite a bit because it does need to find some evidence
for its generations. But that being said, there's no guarantee that it's going to point to the right thing at all.
So there's many different ways of fixing for this. One is, of course, collecting more data
related to the reasoning that you wanted to do. But a better one is to even have verification methods that
verify based on the points, whether the output is something you should trust or not. So a lot of the bigger models and bigger companies,
what they typically do when you use any of their models is they don't have a single model that's generating an output.
You usually take that output and pass it through other verifiers before it even gets to the user.
And that mitigates some of these problems. But it is an active line of inquiry right now. How do you reduce hallucinations and also improve these models
actual accuracy? Yeah. So repeating your question, is it possible for these models
to build new tools when a capability requires a tool that it doesn't have?
Yes, it can. We have a few preliminary experiments in those directions
as well, where you can tell a model, here's a capability that I want. And what you can build is a system that automatically tries to collect training data
and builds a tool for specific use cases. But that line of work is still again, in its infancy.
It's one that we're actively working on. But a lot of folks are excited about that direction.


We're here with our final guest lecturer for the course. And today, we have Dr. Yunzhu Li.
He is an assistant professor of computer science at Columbia University, where he leads the Robotic Perception,
Interaction, and Learning Lab. He is also a former instructor of CS231N, like all of our guest lecturers.
And he taught the course in 2023 while he completed his postdoc here at Stanford with professors Fei-Fei Li and Jiajun Wu.
His research lies at the intersection of robotics, computer vision, and machine learning. And specifically, his work focuses on robot learning
and aims to significantly expand robots' perception and physical interaction capabilities.
In today's lecture, he'll be discussing exactly that, topic robot learning. And I'll now hand it off to Yunzhu for today's lecture.
Yeah, thank you, Dean, for the very kind introduction. I'm super excited to be here. The last time I was here giving lectures
was two years ago, 2023. And similar, lately, I was going through many of the lectures.
And today, I'm going to be talking about some of the things that I have been working on.
And it's also a very coherent piece of this overall picture on deep learning for computer vision.
And this is specifically on robot learning. So I'll be discussing what are some of the interesting considerations
especially in enabling the robots to better perceive and interact with the physical world
and how some of the considerations might be different from some typical computer vision tasks
and computer vision methods. So first of all, you guys have already
learned a lot about supervised learning. The scene and the setup for supervised learning
is that you have data x and y. X is the input, and y is the label. And you are trying to learn a mapping that maps from the input
x to the output y. There are examples you have already learned, like classification, regression, object detection, et cetera.
And you have also learned about self-supervised learning, where instead of having labels, in this case,
you are just having the data without any labels. What you are trying to do is you come up
with learning algorithms that is able to extract or identify the underlying hidden structures of the data,
just by working or designing some auxiliary loss. Some typical examples, including autoencoders, and there's
many other examples in trying to do unsupervised learning or self-supervised learning on top
of this mass amount of unlabeled data. And the special thing and the unique things
about robot learning is that the robot has to make physical interactions that make interactions with the world.
So it's not just you have the input and outputs and mapping from the input x to y or some kind of latent representations.
It's really about you are influenced evolutions of the environments. So no matter what action you decide
to take in the real world, the world will change as a result of that actions. And the world will give you some kind of new observations
or reward telling you how the thing-- how the environment has been changing and how good you are in executing certain tasks.
So the goal is trying to actually come up with a sequence of actions with feedback from the environments,
that is, to maximize some reward or minimize some cost. And robot learning, especially in the recent years,
has attracted significant attention both within academia and also within industries.
So we have seen many startup companies and including, for example, physical intelligence like Tesla bots
or Figure. They are producing those very seemingly very nice and fancy
videos of robots doing a wide range of very complicated tasks, like folding shirts, like manipulating coffee beans,
or trying to have this human noise, like doing interesting tasks in the real physical world.
So this field, like I mentioned, has attracted a lot of attention and also a lot of investments.
Here are just some examples of some recent startups in the field of robot learnings that is able to attract a huge amount of investments, trying
to build this general purpose robots that can make physical interactions with the environments.
So obviously, not only those startups, mainly big established companies are also having their own robotics
investigations and initiatives, trying to develop their own general purpose robots that is able to make general purpose and high performance
physical interactions with the environment. So for today's lectures, I'm going
to give you some kind of overviews on some of the key techniques enabling
factors of the current success and boom of robot learnings. We will start with problem formulations.
How can we more concretely define the problems we have been building, and how can we formally think about the robust interactions
with the environments? So I will then discuss the more perception side.
I will talk about the different considerations between how robots perceive the environments and how people typically consider in the computer vision
community and what's special about robots' perception, now talking about reinforcement learning, model
learning, model-based planning, imitation learning, also some of the recent trends on robotic foundation models
and also using the remaining time to discuss some of the challenges we still see lies ahead of us.
So we'll start with problem formulation. So this is, in general, how the problem
should look like, at least in a graphical illustration. So in the middle, we have this agent.
The agent is given some task objective. This task objective could be, for example, language
instructions from human or some kind of objective functions measuring how good this agent is in doing some specific task.
This agent is taking states from the physical world or some kind of environments.
And the agent decides what action to take, like this at here, that needs to be executed in the physical world.
And this physical world will be updated and given this state's st plus 1, as well as
the rewards, telling the agents how good it is doing its task. So this is how the framework in general looks like.
So you have to be very clear on this type of formulation that consists of goal, states, actions, and also rewards.
That specifically defines the problems of the robot learning
type of scenarios is very different from the computer visions. I would like to say computer vision is mostly
about trying to learn some kind of representations of the environment based on the inputs, like high-dimensional data.
But for robotics, it's basically trying to solve some kind of optimization problems
where you have the constraints, which is a physical world of the environment. You have your objective functions
defined over your goal. And you are essentially trying to solve this optimization problems by coming up with a sequence of actions
that can maximize or minimize your objective functions. So that's a key difference between robot learning
and what people typically consider in computer vision. So some specific instantiations of this problem
like, for example, cart-pole, the goal can be balance a pole on the top of a movable cart.
And the states of this environment essentially describe the physical state status of the systems, which can include the angle, the angular
speed, positions, horizontal velocities, et cetera. And the action would be the horizontal force
that is applied to the carts. And you can have the rewards where 1 indicating at each time
step if the poll is being kept as an upright position.
Some other example could include robot locomotion, where the goal is to make these robots move forwards.
And the states could include the angle position velocities of all joints within this robot.
And the action could be the torque applied to each one of the joints. And the reward can be 1 at each time.
The robot make a step forwards and also being kept in an upright positions.
And also some interesting examples including the Atari games. The goal can be complete the game with the highest score, as
high as possible you can get. And the states will be the raw pixel inputs of the gaming screen.
And action could be the gaming control like up, down, left, and right. And the reward could be the score increase
and decrease at each time step. And some of the more famous examples you
probably have noticed earlier, especially with the developments of AlphaGo. And the definition and the problem of Go
can also be defined in similar ways, where the goal is to win the game. And the states will be all the pieces that are currently
already on the Go board. And action could be where to put the next piece down on this board.
And the reward could be, on the last turn, if you win, you get a reward of 1, and if you lose, you get a reward of 0.
And this not only applies to, for example, gaming domains. Even with the recent developments of large language
models, you can also think about those problems, especially for sequential generation problems,
in a similar manner where the goal could be to predict the next word. And the states could be the current words in the sentence.
And the action will be what the specific next words you want to put there. And if it is correct, you get the reward.
If it is incorrect, you get a reward of 0. And similarly, now, you probably have already
played with many of the chatbots quite a lot. And you can also define a problem similarly,
where the goal is to be a good companion to the human user. The states could be the current conversation.
And action that should be generated by the chatbots will be the next sentence you are given to the human user.
And according to the human evaluations, we could define the reward if the person is happy.
If they are satisfied, you get a reward of 1. And if you are not happy or neutral,
you get some other rewards. And more specifically, for example, in the robotics domain.
And the task could be to fold the clothes. And we want the clothes-- we fold it nicely.
And the states is the current observations the robot is getting from this environment, which
could include the multi-view RGB or RGBD observations of the environment.
And the robot needs to decide its actions, how to move its end-effectors. Should it close or open its grippers
in order to manipulate this cloth? And according to human evaluations, if the cloth is properly folded, it gives the robot
a reward of 1, and if the cloth is not folded, you give the reward of 0. So here is actually how you want to more concretely think
about robot learning problem. It really is a way that allows the agents to interact
with the world. It considers the effect of an action and also the sequential decision-making problems.
That is different from what people typically consider in computer vision. We just need to predict the outputs.
And the goal, states, actions, and the rewards and the objective functions are the things
you need to keep in mind whenever you are thinking about problems along this direction.
So this is about problem formulation. So question is how specific the reward needs to be designed.
In many of the tasks, the reward can have many different types of specifications. For example, in the self-driving,
the reward could be as fast as possible or reward could be like we want the passengers to feel comfortable as you
are driving along the roads. So even for clothes folding, depending on the user's preference, our clothes
can be folded in many different ways. Some want the total area to be as small as possible. Some want it to be as smooth as possible.
There could be different types of rewards. Here, I'm just talking in generic terms.
If a person looks at the clothes, do they think, this is folded, or not? But more specifically, in terms of the reward design,
there's actually a lot of nuances satisfying a specific need of a specific application.
OK. So I'll continue. So this is how we are thinking about those robot learning problem that allows the agents to interact
with the physical world. Now, I'm moving on to robot perception, especially in discussing how the perception
problem within this robot learning domain is different from what people typically consider in computer vision.
So this image again-- you're actually going to see this image again and again through today's lecture.
So this is, essentially, in the question of how we are handling whatever information you are getting
from the physical world. The physical world can give you, for example, high-dimensional RGB observation or RGBD observations.
It could also include some other sensory data like tactile sensings. And this robot perception problem
is essentially trying to distill or harness some structured knowledge from those high-dimensional data that
is useful for the robot to do the downstream decision making. And essentially, the question we are trying to tackle
is trying to make sense of this unstructured real world. And the real world can be very messy.
So essentially, the observations the robots are getting from the environments can only contain incomplete knowledge of the objects
and the environments. There could be occlusions. There could also be errors from the sensory data.
And the imperfect action may also lead to failure. For example, the robots can try to grasp some objects,
but their grasping behavior may not always be successful. Sometimes, you will accidentally drop that object,
which will also cause evolutions and unexpected changes of this environment.
They will also need to have this perception system that is able to handle those scenarios. And also this environment can change.
It is dynamic, consists of not just rigid object but deformable object-- clothes, ropes, granular medias.
There could be other agents, like dogs or other kids or other humans that are also in the same environments,
messing up with the world. And your perception system needs to be able to cope with all those kind of changes.
So that is why, in the robotics domain, people typically not just work with a camera data.
They try to add as much sensor as possible to the robots as long as they can provide some useful informations.
It's really considered, for example, the tactile sensings, the audio information, the depth information, et cetera.
And typically, we will have to design a system that is able to put all the sensors together
that allows them to complement each other, whereas all the information might tell you things
about the physical context. And the tactile information might tell you about whether a graph is stable or not.
And the camera information tells you about something that is more on the higher level, on the grand scheme of things, about the overall state
of this environment. So how these sensors can be composed together and work together is very, very important
to design a capable robotic system that are working in the real physical world.
And besides the numbers of sensory modalities, very important difference between a robot vision
and computer vision is trying to really understand the effect of the actions and also the affordance
of this environment. On the left is a very typical example you have already seen in computer vision, which is trying
to do instance segmentation. What you are given is this 2D image. You have segments, different instances from this 2D image,
like by drawing a contour over this 2D pixels. But what's different in the robotics domain, for example,
on the right-- the robot can, for example, given one object. And this object seems to be maybe just one object or maybe
a lot of pieces that are, for example, stacked into each other. So the robot has to know what type of actions
will allow it to have better understanding, better perceptions about this environment. Is this one piece of object or multiple
pieces composed together? So the robot should come up with actions like perturb and actively interact with the environments for the robot
to get a better perception about the state of this environment. So that is why a robot vision is embodied, active, and also
environmentally situated. By embodied, what we mean is robots
have this kind of physical body that is directly experiencing the physical world directly.
Their actions are part of a dynamic with the world that have immediate feedback on their own sensations.
And active, meaning the robots are active perceivers. It knows why it wishes to sense and chooses what to perceive
and determines how and when and where to achieve that perception. You can move your head around.
If you want to know what's behind this table, you can just move around to see what's behind the table. So this is the active part, which
is different from what people typically consider in computer vision. They are mostly working with a passively collected data set.
The third point is about situated, where the robots are situated in the world. They do not deal with abstract descriptions but with the here
and now of the world directly influencing the behavior of the systems.
Robots really have to understand, especially in clothing, there's perception and action loop.
It sees the world and understand its goals and be able to act in the environment
upon its perceptions. Sometimes, the robot don't have to know the full state of the environment.
For example, if I'm buttoning my shirt, I only have to know the local regions near that button for me
to button that shirt. So some of the perception has to be tightly coupled and co-designed with the task
and the downstream decision-making systems for the robot to focus on the relevant region or task-relevant regions of the environment to be properly--
a closest perception and action loop. So this is about some very specific considerations
and how robots' perception might be different from what people typically consider in computer vision.
I will be starting to discuss some of the algorithms that not only allow the robot to see but allow
the robot to act in the world. And we'll start with reinforcement learning.
Remember, earlier, we have seen this image. The robot has to act upon this environment
and get rewards from this environment. So one very typical way of trying
to solve this optimization problem is allow the robots to interact with the world as extensively
and as massively as possible. You just collect all the experience data
and do this type of trials and errors. Allow the robots to understand this action leads to high reward
and that action leads to lower rewards. And we can pivot the agents' behaviors
towards the actions that give the agent some higher rewards. So this is the general ideas of reinforcement learning
is really a way to allow the agents to constantly interact with the environment and do this trial
and error to maximize the reward or minimize the cost. And here I also want to be a bit more specific in discussing
the difference between reinforcement learning and supervised learning. So this is a typical framework of how reinforcement learning
looks like. You have the environments. Environment gives the agent some states. Agents generate actions.
And environments give the agent a feedback, which is the reward. And environments will change, where the environment will
give the agents the new states, st plus 1, and essentially a sequence, like a temporal sequence
on the temporal domain where the robot has to-- the agent has to make this sequential decisions.
And here is a typical image typically look like for supervised learning.
So you have the data set. The data set will input to the model this x.
And this model will generate the prediction y. And you will be able to calculate the loss according
to the model's predictions versus the ground truth from this data sets. So this is a typical setup of supervised learning.
And the key difference-- some of the key differences between reinforcement learning and supervised learning is that the environments might be stochastic
or the same actions, the environment might change in a different manner. Let's say, if you are pushing a box forward,
depending on the distribution of the supporting force, the same exact actions will lead to-- can potentially
lead to the box rotating into different angles, meaning there can be uncertainties and stochasticity
in the environments that will lead to a stochastic behavior of these environments, which
will also give these agents stochastic rewards, where the same action may not always lead to the same rewards.
So this is very different from supervised learning. We are dealing with an uncertain dynamical system.
The second is about the question of credit assignments. So for supervised learning, you give the inputs,
you predict the outputs, and you already calculate the loss. Now, you directly know what are the mistakes
and what are the errors you are making by making a specific prediction. But in the reinforcement learning
or sequential decision-making domain, the rewards can be delayed, meaning if you play the game of Go, only until the very end
of this episode, do you realize you are winning or you were losing.
And that rewards there 01. [INAUDIBLE] is because of some very, very early steps, maybe
even the first steps or some steps during the middle of the games. So how do you properly assign the credits
you are getting along this sequential decision making towards all the actions is also another very tricky
and important question people hope to answer using reinforcement learning.
The third thing is the nondiffusion abilities of this dynamical systems.
For example, for supervised learning, you have the inputs. You feed the inputs through the model.
You get the outputs. You calculate the loss. So everything along this process is differentiable.
So you can directly gather gradients of the loss functions with respect to the parameters within the model.
But that's typically not the case for reinforcement learning where the environments can oftentimes
not differentiable. So how do you properly get the gradients of the rewards with respect to the actions can be tricky.
Sometimes, people have to realize on a massive sampling to do those type of zero order estimations of the gradients
for you to do proper learning. That also is another difference.
The last difference is about this nonstationarity of this scenarios where the evolutions
and the states of the environments is really a result of your actions. For supervised learning, whatever you predict,
it doesn't influence other data points you are getting from this data set. But your actions will influence the next state
you are getting in this sequential decision-making problems. That is also what makes this kind of reinforcement learning
problem a little bit more nuanced than supervised learning.
So here are some more specific examples. Like for example, playing this Atari games,
like I mentioned earlier. The goal could be to complete the games with the highest score. And the states would be the raw pixel inputs
from the gaming screen. And the action could be up, down, left, and right from the keyboard. And we're trying to--
the rewards are the score increase and decrease at each time step.
And some typical algorithms within this domain either lies in the field of, for example, like a Q-learning or, for example, policy iterations.
Here's my examples of trying to learn this Q function. Q function essentially measures the discounted expected future
accumulated rewards like when you apply a specific action a at a specific state s.
And you will be able to get these Q functions through interactions with this gaming environments.
And after you have learned this Q functions, you can evaluate, for example, what
are the Q values you are getting by applying different actions. In this case, there's left and right, ups and downs.
So there could potentially be four actions. And given these four actions, you can look at their Q values
and just execute the actions that give you the highest Q values. So that is what allows you to do this type of decision
making in this domain. Because today we're going to cover a lot of materials,
so we won't go into the details of the reinforcement learning. But some of the current state-of-the-art reinforcement
learning algorithms, including SAC, Soft Actor Critic, and also PPO, Proximal Policy Optimization.
So if you are interested, you are very welcome to look at those algorithms in detail. There's a lot of open source implementations and tutorials
online. But here I want to highlight to you some of the results you could potentially
get by going through this reinforcement learning, specifically Q-learning process.
This is developed by Google DeepMind that is trying to develop these agents, that is trying to play the game Breakout in this kind of Atari
world. So just after 10 minutes of training, the robot, the agent can already touch the ball
but, oftentimes, can still miss the ball quite often. And after some more times of learning, for example,
two hours of training, and the agents can control this kind of paths in a much more
reliable and consistent fashion that can, nearly all the time, can catch the ball and be able to constantly get
more and more rewards by bouncing back.
And after full hours of training, something that's interesting happens, where the agents come up with, actually,
a novel strategy, which possibly is not known to many of you, that is, trying to push, bounce the ball
back to create the tunnel on the left side of this wall. And then it will push this ball on the upper side of the wall
to do this very efficient reductions of those bricks.
This is the type of strategy that can be discovered by reinforcement learning. So this is what's nice about reinforcement
learning, meaning you allow the agents to do very extensive and comprehensive exploration and interactions with the world.
And it is totally possible for this reinforcement learning agents to discover some strategies that
are better than even the best human players. A very typical example would be the game of Go.
So when AlphaGo came out in the January 2016, it was also about the time when I
was trying to decide what type of research directions I'm going to go. Before that time, I was just working on deep
learning for computer vision. But when AlphaGo came out, I'm like, I have to work on this kind of decision-making problem.
So that's why I started to touch upon reinforcement learning, imitation learning, and, all the way until now,
to do robot learning that allows the robots to do physical interactions with the environments. So I wasn't satisfied with just working
with a passively collected data set, but we really want an agent that can do active interactions with the environment.
So the question was, how does specifically this Q-function works?
So you can see, this Q takes as input the state s and also the action.
And this data would essentially be the parameters of this Q function, where the Q is instantiated
as a neural network. In this specific case, like I mentioned earlier, the state is the raw pixel inputs
that you're actually getting from the gaming screen. So the inputs could be this four steps,
four frames that are directly inputted to this Q function. And if you are dealing with images,
a very straightforward way of instantiating this Q function is to use convolutional neural networks.
So you have convolutional layers like shown in this kind of orange blocks. And then you'll be able to go through this fully connected
layers to directly derive this Q value. And in this case, because there are four discrete actions--
in this case, probably just left and right. But let's say there's four discrete actions-- up and down, left and right. So you will be able to have different Q value
estimations that is the results of this specific action a. And that's how you can use these Q values to make decisions
on what action to take that is the most effective and maximizing this Q value. Does that answer your question?
Yes, this is when AlphaGo came out.
And obviously, since then, there has been a lot of developments and evolutions in making this type of gaming agents better and better.
So then later, there's AlphaGo Zero. That is essentially a simplified version of AlphaGo,
then no longer using any imitation learning to do any initialization. And it's able to beat, at that time, the number one
player, Ke Jie. So this is actually one thing, one lesson people learned
inside this AI communities, which you can call it the bitter lesson from the Rich Sutton,
where sometimes you want to find the simplest recipes that is the most and best compatible with the scaling.
You want to leverage the scale, the power of scalings. And sometimes, making this method simpler
will actually give you better performance by making it more compatible with whatever infrastructure
you can use for scaling things up. And then later, they develop Alpha Zero
that is able to generalize the same set of algorithms into not just chess-- not just Go but other games like chess and shogi.
And then they designed MuZero that not just do this kind of model-free reinforcement
learning, but it's able to learn a latent space dynamics model to plan over that gives you an even better performance.
So for this specific domain, I would say, especially in the gaming developments, that really empowers a lot of design
and developments in how people can do better and more assembly efficient and more scalable design of those reinforcement
learning agents. And in November 2019, Lee Sedol, who was beaten by of AlphaGo,
announce his retirement. And he realized they're just not-- it's just not possible, at that time, for any human players
to beat the best like AI agents out there. And obviously, since then, there has
been other more complex games like StarCraft and Dota that shows that as long as you put enough compute, as long
as you have a very well designed algorithms and infrastructure for you to do the reinforcement learning,
you can get very, very good performance in games that are actually noticeably and orders of magnitude
more complicated than the game of Go. So I would say, if you have a game, a reasonably designed
game, there's a very good chance, if you put the sufficient resource,
you can have very, very powerful gaming agents. So not just in games, people have also
been developing this reinforcement learning algorithms and agents that can work directly in the real physical world.
So this, on the left, is a work from ETH that was published in Science Robotics 2020.
That essentially changed my mind about how useful reinforcement learning can be for real physical robots
because before it was just mostly games like the [INAUDIBLE]. In games, there's a lot of--
you can just spawn as many games as possible. But for the real world, there's always sim-to-real gap,
where you are training on the same game, you are also testing on the same game. But for robots, if you train on a simulation,
how much does the sim-to-real gap matters for the agents to generalize to the real environments?
And this paper really convinced me that, sometimes, the sim-to-real gap just may not matter that much.
So we are not simulating the bushes. We are not simulating the snows. But the agents that's using reinforcement learning,
that training simulation, can give you some very, very robust performance in the real physical world, like snows and [INAUDIBLE] very, very
slippery surface. On the right is a very recent video released by Unitree that shows just another level of dexterity
for locomotions that can do this sim-to-real transfer, allow these robots to do very, very crazy
and dynamic behaviors. They can navigate into some very rough and challenging terrains.
I would say, in the domain of robot locomotion, it is close to be a solved problem.
And the solution to this problem is exactly reinforcement learning. So this is about locomotion.
So other domain is about manipulations or the robot has to manipulate the objects in the real physical world.
So in 2019, when OpenAI was still like-- touch upon robotics, they designed the systems
that are trying to do dexterous manipulations of Rubik's cube. They are able to do the reinforcement learning
in simulation and do sim-to-real transfer that allows these kind of robots to solve this Rubik's cube.
But one caveat is that their success rate is very, very low. Although these videos seem to be very beautifully done,
but their success rate was very low. And if you really look at the papers, they only tested a very limited amount of trials.
And given that number, possibly the reliability is not very satisfying.
But still, since then, people have been able to extend upon this dexterous manipulation problems
and allow the robots to do enhanced dexterous manipulation and reorientations of different types of objects
and into different target configurations. It's all thanks to the developments of reinforcement
learning. But we can see, until now, our examples in locomotions
and in hand manipulation, it doesn't really solve the problem for them, but if the robot can just fold the clothes for you or do the laundry for you
in your home. For manipulation, still in this kind of very isolated domains,
like working with this kind of isolated environments. So this is actually some of the key challenges and bottlenecks
of existing model-free reinforcement learning. It is mostly learned from the trials and error
with the environments, and it requires extensive interactions with the world.
For example, for the AlphaGo Zero, it actually learns from 3,000 years of human knowledge in 40
days, which is amazing. But it still requires many, many years
of computation, years of equivalent computations for the agents to learn. If in domains where there's a huge sim-to-real gap
and you want to do the reinforcement learning in the real physical world, that will be a huge bottleneck
for learning this reinforcement learning agents very effectively. And also, of course, if there is sim-to-real gap, if you only
can learn the model in the real environments, there's a lot of safety concerns. For example, here is an example showing
this kind of learning progressions of an agent that is controlling these humanoid robots to move forwards.
You can see that during this learning process, although at the very end, the robot is able to move forwards,
but there's a lot of very weird behaviors that you can totally imagine if you apply this agent on the real physical robots,
it will fail catastrophically. And it also have a very limited interpretabilities.
And sometimes, it's very hard to correct things when things go wrong. And one interesting thing, if you really
think about how humans learn to interact with the environment versus pure reinforcement learning,
you realize that we humans have a very intuitive understanding of this environment.
We can imagine how the environment is going to change if we apply a specific action.
So it's exactly this predictive capabilities that allows we, humans, to plan our behavior in achieving
some specific targets. And this predictive capabilities is also actually learned
from we human's physical interactions and everyday experiences with the real physical world.
So going beyond the reinforcement learning, the next topic I want to discuss will be how we can endow the robots with similar capabilities
in imagining the effect of their actions and to do model-based planning. For the specific examples, we have a simulation.
Typically, the simulation people use would be, for example, Isaac Gym or Isaac Sim developed by NVIDIA.
And there are essentially a bunch of rigid body simulations where the robot's just touching this kind of a polygon
type of representation, like a representation of the floor. It is not simulating, for example, the bushes.
It is not simulating those snows. But what people do is to randomize the simulated environments a lot and randomize
the friction, the geometry, and many other physical parameters inside this environment such that people will assume whatever
you encounter in the real physical world is just one data point within the distributions you
randomize within your simulation. So if your policies can be robust, robust in controlling this robots within that distribution,
and if the real world is just one data point within that distribution, the policy can generalize. And so far, at least from this empirical evidence,
this type of assumption actually holds, and the policy actually works very reliably and robustly in the real physical world.
So the question is about, what is the actual command? So actually, in many of the existing demos,
there can be a person providing high-level commands to the robot. For example, which direction should the robots walk?
So the robot rotates in place or just still keep walking forwards. Conditioned on that high-level actions provided by human,
the robot has to decide this kind of low-level actions. The low-level actions are typically, for example, the joint torque that
are applied to each and every one of the joints on top of this robot. So that is how this typically looks
like, meaning humans give high-level commands, conditional high-level commands. The robot has to use this policy to decide
this kind of low-level actions, which is instantiated using joint torque.
So like I mentioned, one biggest lesson I learned from this line of work on locomotion
is that the simulation doesn't have to be perfect. As long as you randomize it enough, it can generalize very robustly in the real environments.
But such lesson hasn't really been generalized very well in the manipulation domain.
So in the manipulation domain, how accurate the simulation needs to be and how much does the sim-to-real gap
matters is still a research question people hope to answer. So I can give you one specific example.
If in the simulation you are pushing a box forwards, if in simulation, the box rotates for 10 degrees
but in reality it rotates for 12 degrees, it may not matter that much. But if in the real world, your grasping was successful.
But in simulation, the object just flies away because of some kind of numerical issues. Or if the object slips away between your fingers,
that's problematic. So there are regions where sim-to-real gap matter. There are other regions sim-to-real gap may not
matter that much in the manipulation domain. And people still are trying to answer and trying to understand how sim-to-real gap can happen
and what are some of the most important recipes and characteristics that this simulation needs to have for the most reliable sim-to-real transfer.
So If I understand your questions correctly, you are asking-- there are still a person providing high-level commands
to the robots. So the question is, can the robot come up with better plans than the human? So I can actually give you a more nuanced perspective.
Although many of these videos seems very nice, there is a human operator operating the robots
to choose which route to go. For example, what people typically do is-- for example,
let's say, there's some kind of rough terrains or some pile of rocks. And the humans can actually try to command the robot
to go forward, trying to climb those kind of rocks. If that fails, humans can actually provide some other high-level commands to get around
this pile of rocks. So there can be some kind of learning also on the human side in understanding the capabilities
of those robots. So this is also why some of this video can actually look very nice because humans select the routes
that the human knows can show the limits and also the capabilities of this kind of low-level controllers.
And how to do that autonomously? That's actually a very interesting question people are also doing research upon.
So then I'm going to continue.
So I've discussed some of the successful examples and power of reinforcement learning and also
discussed the limitations of reinforcement learning. And we still haven't really seen very, very successful
and wide-scale deployments of reinforcement learning in manipulation yet. And we, humans, not just learn from trials and error.
We actually build this type of internal model. So we're asking the question, can we actually learn the models from the robot's interactions
with the environments and using that model for the robot to do better physical interactions?
So specifically, what we are touching upon, again, back to this figure, is how we can learn and approximations of the real physical world,
and how can this approximated physical world that runs on the virtual domain can help
guide the robot's actions and decide what action to take in the physical world?
So let's say, if you already have the model, for example, let's say, you have already learned the models like we humans have in our mental environments,
we can predict, given the current state st and also the action t, how the state of the environment
will change into states t plus 1. And then we can use this, essentially,
as a forward model that, given the current state and action, predict the next state. So what actually is the problem for us
to do the planning, which is essentially an inverse of this forward model? Well, the planning is to give the current state and the target
states and to come up with the action that can allow the robot to achieve the target states.
Given the current state shown in the blue dots, we have the targets shown in the red. We can have maybe some initial guesses of how
the actions might look like. And our model, our approximated learned models, will be able to predict the sequence
evolutions of the states, which is shown in this green trajectory.
And then we can measure the distance between this green dots and the red dots and backpropagates
or doing optimizations using the gradients of their distance
with respect to all the actions along the trajectories to do this type of optimizations, in order to know what actions can guide us
to getting us closer to the targets shown in the red. And obviously, the model may not be accurate enough,
so we typically only executes the first actions, and we obtain the new states from the environment.
And we can re-optimize the action sequence using gradient descent or any other optimization techniques you use to do this trajectory optimizations.
And one of the key benefits, especially recently with the development of GPUs and also neural dynamics model,
is that you can use the GPU for parallel and simultaneously sampling to allow you to do large-scale sampling and optimizations
of those action sequences, which is actually quite efficient. So given this, the general framework,
you have the model, which is this kind of forward process. And you can always use the forward model to do this inverse optimizations to come up
with the actions that can get you closer to your target configuration. And one of the key questions has always
been, what should be the right representation of the environment? What should be the right and most effective state representation s?
And how we can learn this model based on the state representation. And over the years, there has been
many different investigations on choosing or investigating different types of state representations.
Some earlier work, including how can using, for example, just 2D images as a representation of the states
and trying to learn pixel dynamics, meaning how the image might change if you apply a specific
action. This is a work called deep visual foresight, which set off some of the initial works
in the whole domains of word models. And by learning this kind of pixel-based dynamics models,
people can come up with strategies that is able to, for example, minimize the distance between the current observations and some
can rotate the objects and push the objects around in order to achieve the targets shown in green,
and the current state is shown in red. So this is about pixel dynamics.
And what people can also do is to use keypoints as a representation of the environments
to learn keypoints dynamics models. And here, what we can do is to track the movement
of the keypoints on top of this box over the 3D space and also neural dynamics model of those keypoints as a result of some
pushing actions. And then we can allow the robots to use this forward predictive models to plan the robot's behaviors
to track some specific trajectories in order to push this box to achieve our target configurations.
So besides using keypoints, so what if you encountered some objects with even higher degrees
of freedom? So if you go one level finer, you can also represent those objects using a set of particles,
essentially a set of points. Here, which is actually a work that was done while I was here as a postdoc,
we were representing this pile of granular pieces, using a bunch of particles and trying to predict how those particles will move around
if you apply a specific action. And this forward model can allow the robots to do this inverse decision making that
handle a wide range of granular objects of different granular sizes. And we come up with strategies that
can gather those pieces into the target region shown in the bottom right,
like a corner of each segment. And the same model with good feedback from the environments
allow the robots to correct from the model's error and come up with strategies that can be very reliably aggregate
all the object pieces into the target region. And obviously, this model not just
can generalize to different granular pieces of different granular sizes. It can also change to different target configurations.
Here, you will very quickly realize what the target configurations are. The robot has to come up with a strategy that
to do nontrivial redistributions of the granular pieces. And after the redistribution, it has
to align the fine-grained details with the targets like shape. You want to accomplish this like a pile rearrangement task.
The task here is actually to rearrange this granular pieces into different letter shapes, all the way from letter A
to letter Z. And with this kind of forward models, we'll be very successful in coming up
with a sequence of strategies, of course, with feedback from the environments to allow the robot to rearrange this kind of object pieces
into the target regions. And this is actually a highly nontrivial task. And going beyond that, we also have this subsequent work,
which I was also involved and done when I was here at Stanford. And we designed this kind of dumpling-making robots, that is,
actually equipped the robots with 15 different 3D-printed tools.
We have four RGBD cameras looking at the environment to do a reconstruction of the geometry of the store.
And the robots will have to decide what tool to use and what action to take to get this dumpling into--
getting this dough into a dumpling. And the key enabling factor is also this forward predictive models represented using particles.
Or here, the red dots are representing the shape of the tool, and the blue dots are representing the shape of the objects.
The first row is our model's open loop prediction, and second row is what actually happens in the real environment.
So this learned model that directly learns from this real-world interactions can very accurately predict the change of the shape of the dough
when using different tools, applying different actions, and in the end allows us to have this integrated system that can
make a dumpling out of a dough. What's interesting about this video is there's a person constantly perturbing
the robot from doing its job. The robot will take the real-time visual feedback
from this environment to real-time understanding the shape of the dough and then using the current observations and also
the learned dynamics model that predicts how the environment is going to change, how the dose shape will change if you use a tool to apply a specific action,
and, based on this forward model, is making this inverse decision. This decision is happening at two levels,
both at the high level, which is to decide what tool to use, which is a task-level decision making.
And given these tools, the robot also have to make a lower-level, emotion-level decisions
in deciding what specific action to take in order to progress into the next task stage.
Humans are just so annoying, adding pieces, folding the dough. The robot is very robust to this external disturbance
in continuing its progress in doing the task. Here's what's interesting. After the robot casts a circle, the human shows no mercy,
destroys everything. The robot knows you actually have to start from the very beginning, redo the task from the beginning in order
to progress with this kind of task objective. So this really shows the patience and also
the robustness of our systems with this type of external disturbance. And all of these capabilities is enabled
by this kind of neural dynamics model that predicts how the shape of the dough will change if you apply a specific action.
In the end, the robot will place the skin on top of this dumpling clip and move this kind of fillings
on top of this dumpling skin and use a hook to close the dumpling clip in order to use this general purpose robot equipped
with 15 general purpose tools to make a dumpling out of a dough.
So this is about how we can learn the model and how that model can be useful for downstream model-based
planning. So for this specific case, if we want
to describe it more rigorously, we are not using reinforcement learning. We just learn the model and use that model to do planning,
although the plan can be distilled into a policy that can be executed in the real environment in a more
efficient manner. But some people also call it model-based reinforcement learning. Decide which background you are coming from.
You can either call it model learning and model-based planning. You can also call it model-based reinforcement learning.
But the key idea is you want to learn the model from the robot's physical interactions with the real physical world
and using that learned model that is very effective in helping the robot to decide its behaviors to progress with the task
objective. So in this specific case, the high-level planning and low-level decision making is done by two different models.
So over the high level, we are given the current state, current observation of the environments and the target's
the robot able to achieve, essentially a classifier that classify which tool to use.
And conditional on this classifier, tool label, this is a low-level policy that decides
what specific action to take in order to progress into the next task stage. Very good question.
So back then, this work was done in 2023. At that time, visual language model wasn't very powerful.
So at that time, what we did was to allow a human operator to do the data collection, demonstration
of the task for 10 times. We use that data to train this kind of classifier to classify what tool to use.
That allows us to actually jump back and forth over this chain. Like I mentioned earlier, after the robot cuts a circle,
the human destroys everything. The robot knows to jump back to some earlier stages that fits to its current observation in order
to do the proper recovery from the external disturbances. So in this specific case, what we have been doing
is a combination of sampling-based trajectory optimization versus policy learning.
So what we have been doing is to give the current state of this dough. We have our forward predictive models.
We'll be able to sample a bunch of actions and sample a bunch of tools to predict what is the evolutions
of the shape of that dough. And then we'll compare the model's prediction with the targets we hope to achieve,
which is similar to what I showed earlier. For example, our model predicts the shape of the dough will go into this green dots, but the target
is this red dots, while comparing their distance. And then that allows us to select the most effective actions that can get us to the target
to be as close as possible. And we can do a lot of samples like this. But sampling during the test time is very time-consuming.
So we do this type of sampling in an offline fashion, which gives us a data set. And we can use that data set to train a policy that can
be inferred at a very, very-- using a very short period of time to do the inference during the test time.
There is still a neural network as the policies. Yeah. Although the policy is learned by distilling from our models
predictions over a huge amount of samples. For this specific work, there is no physics-based simulation
at all. We actually have a baseline that uses a state-of-the-art deformable object simulator, which is called MPM,
Material Point Methods. What we realize is that even if we do very extensive system
identification, like estimating the parameters of those physics-based deformable object simulator,
the identified model is noticeably less accurate than the model that directly learned from the real-world interactions.
Like I showed earlier, for example, the first row is our model's open loop prediction. The second row is the ground truth.
Our model's prediction aligns very well with the ground truth, which is just much more accurate than whatever physics-based simulator is
out there. OK. So if there are no more questions, I will continue.
So what do we have discussed in this kind of model learning and how this learned model can be effective for the downstream model-based planning.
And next category of algorithms is imitation learning. So just to recap a little bit, we
discussed reinforcement learning. That is directly learning the policies by doing trials and error with the environments, which
has a lot of troubles, for example, the sample efficiency, the safety concerns. And for the model learning, what we have been doing
is actually forced back to the category of supervised learning, where we have the evolutions
of the environments. You use that data to do supervised learning to train this model and using this model
to do model-based planning. And instead of just using supervised learning to train the model, people are also asking,
can we do supervised learning also for the policies? This is the general idea of imitation learning, meaning
can we have a big data set that shows how a task needs
to be done and using this data set to train this kind of policies? I'm showing this figure again.
This is trying to learn this kind of policy, taking the states as inputs that predict the actions.
And all of this kind of learning signals and learning procedures are done through a large-scale collected data,
from human demoing to the robots how a task needs to be done.
So learning from demonstration is, of course, not new. It has been investigated for decades. It's also constantly how we human is actually
learning to perform a lot of physical interactions or social activities in the real world,
since we are very, very young. So one of the most earlier classic imitation
learning algorithms is called behavior cloning, essentially trying to learn this kind of mapping that maps currently
from this observation o into the action a. And this policy is represented using this function
pi parameterized by the theta. So one of the key issues for behavior cloning
is called cascading error because, like I mentioned, the key difference between the robot learning
or agents' interaction with the environment is it is a sequential decision-making problem.
It differs from a typical supervised learning in the typical computer vision domain in that your error can accumulate
and be amplified over time. Let's say, at the very beginning, you made a very small error.
That small error can lead to a state that slightly deviates from the distribution of data
used to train your model. That will lead the policy to make an even larger error. And this error will be amplified over the temporal horizons.
That leads to a trajectory that can deviate quite a lot from the demonstration trajectories. So that's the typical issues of behavioral cloning.
So that's why, oftentimes, when people are trying to make imitation learning work, people will follow this type of pipeline, where, on the top,
we have the demonstration collected by the experts. Then we'll use that as a training data to do supervised
learning to train this policy. And we'll rule out the policy in the real environment and observe those failure cases.
And we either collect additional data or provide corrective behaviors that
allows these data sets to not only contain the initial demonstrations but also those corrective behaviors
that gets the errors from the policies back to the canonical trajectory or get back to the trajectory.
They can still successfully accomplish the task. So this is actually a typical life cycle. We are trying to develop any imitation learning
agents or imitation learning algorithms in the real physical world.
And along these lines, because if people do this kind of imitation learning,
there's not a very explicit definition of what the task actually is.
The task is implicitly hidden within those demonstrations. So there's a class of algorithms called
inverse reinforcement learning, where on the left is what people typically think about for reinforcement
learning, whereas on the right, where people are trying to use this inverse reinforcement learning to summarize the rewards from your demonstrations
and be able to use that reward to do typical reinforcement learning to learn this kind of algorithms.
Some of the earlier success examples were actually also developed at Stanford by Pieter Abbeel and also Andrew Ng.
It allows them to control helicopters to do some very, very crazy behaviors.
And this is actually a very old work. And be able to achieve this type of agile and effective behaviors
on these real physical helicopters is very impressive at that time. So this is the power of learning from demonstrations
and using that demonstration to summarize the rewards. And in connections with reinforcement learning, this is what we are able to achieve.
So obviously, over the years, people have been making the imitation learning algorithms
more and more effective, especially in connecting with, for example, energy-based models.
So instead of learning this kind of explicit policy shown on the left, they directly do the mapping from the observation
all through the actions. If you are coming up with this kind of implicit policies, that takes the idea from energy-based models
that direct taking the observation and actions to predict the score and using this kind of energy-based model
to do inference to get this kind of predicted actions a has allows the robots to handle demonstrations that
are very multi-modal or handle scenarios where the optimization landscapes may not be very, very smooth.
And the robot is able to come up with this kind of strategies, distill these policies from the demonstrations
in doing this kind of content-rich manipulation tasks. In order to say--
some of the recent, very recent success of robot learning as a whole is the results of this work
called diffusion policy, which, again, is also taking some of the advances in the community
of generative models. For this one, for the implicit behavior cloning, people are drawing inspiration from development
of energy-based model. Energy-based model is a type of generative model developed in the deep learning community.
And there's another class of more powerful models in the deep learning community is called diffusion models.
And people are also trying to use the diffusion models to use it as a policy function class to allow the agents to also inherit
the benefits and the properties from those diffusion models. So this work was originally done at Columbia.
That's where I am right now. And the leads, like the PI of this work, now come to Stanford.
You can see, many of the work I selected has a lot of roots here at Stanford.
She is currently at the W departments at Stanford. And this policy really shows a very diverse set
of capabilities, allow the robots to do not just planner pushing, but many fine-grained
manipulation task. Not only pick and place, but for example here, spread butter on top of the spreads
and also scrambled eggs, also peeling the potatoes
and sliding the books. So it really shows that this type of recipe, where you collect a bunch of demonstrations
and using the best policies, learning mechanisms, you can get a policy that works in the real physical world
in a very, very efficient manner, meaning you collect the data in the morning. You train the policy in the nuance.
In the afternoon, you can have a working policy working in the real physical world. So obviously, there's a lot of caveats
in how reliable your policy is and how generalizable your policy is, how diversified the initial configuration can
be for the policy to still work very robustly. But still, imitation learning is the most efficient way for you
to get a policy that can do something interesting in the real physical world. And for the policies to be very effective and robust
to the real-world variations, this type of iterative data collections will
need to be in place for the policy to cover those kind of unexpected behaviors
or some kind of deviating behaviors. So this is about imitation learning. So any questions?
OK, so if there's no more questions,
I will use the remaining time to discuss some of the recent developments that
drive all the craziness about robot learning, which is robotic foundation models.
And of course, this is a very involved domain. Actually, for each one of these items,
you can actually have a course around them. So for today's lecture, I'm just skimming through them very,
very quickly. I only tell you the gist, the high-level knowledge you need to get by looking at those terms.
And for robotic foundation models, it is a type of model that is very similar to reinforcement
learning or imitation learning in their function class. There's no explicit representation for them
of the states or this kind of model. For example, this robotic foundation model doesn't learn the model of the environments.
It is still a policy that maps from the observation and goes into the actions.
That's still like a representative-- can be very nicely represented using these figures. So you have this agents, which is
a policy that takes the current state and also the goal as inputs. And you're trying to generate these actions that
can be executed in the real physical world. But you might say that this is very similar to imitation learning and reinforcement learning.
So what's special about this robotic foundation models? So this is actually all rooted back
to all the developments within the foundation model domain, especially those language-related foundation
model and also those vision language-related foundation models, meaning it is a policy.
But it needs to generalize much better than a policy that just works for one specific task.
Here is actually my definitions. I'm drawing analogies from the current developments of vision
language models, meaning their outputs may not always be the perfect one, but it will always
generate something reasonable as you prompts this kind of foundation model. So what we hope to achieve with this robotic foundation model
is the synthesized action may not always be the optimal actions as conditioned
by the observation and the task. But the general trajectory will always be beautiful and reasonable to execute
in the real physical world. Beautiful meaning you shouldn't use any jiggling motions. It should be smooth and continuous.
Reasonable meaning you should listen to the language instructions you are given to the robots. So obviously, there are also many different names describing
exactly the same things. Some people call it Vision Language Action Models like VLAs. Some people call it large behavior models.
But in the essence, they are all describing the same thing, meaning this policy, taking the observation and language
instructions or whatever, like a task specification. You're trying to generate the actions that generalize widely
across a wide range of scenarios. So this area is actually quite noisy.
Noisy meaning it's very, very hard to quantify the progress of different kinds
of robotic foundation models. Because you're calling it foundation model, what does that mean? That means you expect this model to generalize very broadly
over a wide range of scenarios. If that's your expectation, you actually need significant evidence to show it actually
generalizes broadly. So that's why evaluation and quantitative measurements of their progress is very challenging.
But still, by looking at their empirical videos, you can still see a lot of very interesting and concrete
progress over the past two years. So a lot of the earlier investigation starts with RT-1, which was released
in the December of 2022. And since then, I would say maybe roughly every half a year,
there's a new model, for example, RT-2, RT-X, OpenVLA, and some of the recent ones like Pi-Zero,
that is making concrete progress along these lines of developing more and more generalizable robotic foundation models.
And actually, this year, there's a boost. There's a [INAUDIBLE] first of a lot of foundation models,
like Helix, Hi-Robot, Gemini Robotics, Pi-0.5, et cetera. So there's a lot of investigations
and also investments in this domain in not only like a capital investment
but talent investments in developing better, better, and better and more generalizable
robotic foundation models. So due to the time, I clearly cannot go into the details
of all these models. So if you are interested, I actually gave a tutorial two months ago at [INAUDIBLE],
specifically describing and discussing some of the models along this axis. If you are interested, please go and watch it.
And for today, I'll be mostly giving you a high-level overview of what actually is essential for this kind of foundation
models and what it actually looks like, with any examples from Pi-Zero.
So Pi-Zero was first released in October 2024.
I think this is the word that convinced me that this type of robotic foundation model can do some very reliable dexterous manipulations
in the real-world environments. It can handle cloth folding and box folding and many other different types of manipulation tasks
at a very reliable manner. And here is how the framework actually looks like on the high level.
On the left is data sets. So for any model to be called the foundation model,
it needs a fuel for that foundation model. And that fuel is data. So they aggregate a lot of data both within academia
and also data collected by themselves across many different embodiments, where the robot is doing some kind
of interesting and useful task in the real-world environments. And they use this data to do pre-training.
And one important caveats of this pre-training is this starts with a pre-trained visual language
model, the vision language model that's already trained on vast amount of vision-language-related data
that can naturally adapt those kind of semantically knowledge from those models. And together, by doing code fine-tuning, what
they call code fine-tuning, using both objective for action predictions and also the objective adapted
from those vision question answering those type of tasks, you will be able to first preserve the semantic knowledge
within those models. But at the same time, you can predict the robot actions.
And this is the pre-training stage. A very important design for many of the existing robotic
foundation models is called post-training, which is also inspired by many of the developments
in the large language model communities where you have this base model. Base model can give you some reasonable baseline performance.
But if you really want the performance to be very, very good on a specific task, you actually have to collect task-specific data to fine-tune the models,
do post-training on the data for that specific task for the performance to be satisfied.
So they are evaluating their whole systems over three different categories. The first one is directly using their base model.
And their base model can already be good enough for some very simple in-distribution data.
The task is actually the task that might have already been encountered during the pre-training stage.
For different task but slightly more complicated, you can do post-training to allow the base
model to further improve on those in-distribution tasks. And for unseen task, typically you
have to do post-training by collecting those task-specific data and fine-tune your pre-trained model
on these tasks for you to be performance. And this Pi-Zero model is actually open sourced.
And you can just download the checkpoints. The students in my lab have already been starting to play with their models
and trying to do post-training. And we're starting to see some very promising results. So if you are interested, I highly encourage you to try it.
That is a very good question. So you are essentially asking about the efficiency of the existing robotic foundation models.
So there's a lot of reasons why the policy is actually slower than humans. One of the major reasons is actually adapted
from how the data was collected, how the demonstration data was collected. Typically, for many of these scenarios,
the demonstration data was collected by human teleoperating the robots on that exact same robots
to do the data collection in, for example, folding this box. And human teleoperations is actually
slower than humans just using their hands to do these tasks, even if you have gone through hours of training.
This is because you are just using a different embodiment than an embodiment that you person is the most familiar with
and, also at the same time, because the robot arms are still a certain distance away from you.
There will be occlusion. Sometimes, you have to look very closely, carefully, like changing your heads, changing the viewing
angles in order to really understand, is it the time to progress into the next task stage or not?
There's a lot of caveats and inefficiencies of the current data collection regimes.
That is why the policy directly trained on those data turned out to be slower than the human speeds.
So that's why there's a lot of investigations in how we can do those kind of data collections to be even more efficient, to be at human speeds.
That is actually a very active research direction. So this is a very good question. So for this box folding task, I would
argue this is already a very long horizon task. So I was very impressed by how good this one single policy is
able to handle this long horizon task. But you could argue, if you really want this policy to be useful in a more larger scale,
like in the wild scenarios for them, in your home, you not only want the robot to fold the box. You want it to fold the shirts and clean the beds
and clean all the messes on the floor. If in those type of scenarios-- currently, me, personally, I don't
believe one gigantic policy is able to adapt to those scenarios. Some higher-level abstractions or some kind
of scene graph, some symbolic representations needs to be in place as a condition for this vision
language action models for those policy to be the most effective and useful to steer into different type of tasks and scale
to larger-scale environments and more complicated tasks. So this started with a pre-trained vision language
model. So that's why there's already a lot of semantic knowledge that are learned through this large-scale pre-training using
this vision language data. So that is why some of the generalization are coming for free, meaning the base model can actually
have surprisingly good levels of generalization at the semantic level. And I just have to fine-tune this model with those robot data
to make sure it can also generalize not as a semantic level but also as an action level.
So we can have the question maybe at the end because we are already about time. I still have maybe one-- the last, maybe, two, three minutes,
I will discuss some of the remaining challenges, especially along the development of robot learning models.
So one of the major challenges the whole community recognizes is evaluation.
Evaluation currently is primarily done in the real world. For example, this is a picture of a Google Robotics.
They have a grid of this kind of teleoperating Aloha systems that they are doing data collection and also evaluation.
And real-world evaluation is both costly and noisy. Their exact words to me was, for evaluation, they
have large enough budget such that they can still make progress. This was their exact words, meaning if you were to do the evaluation or I were to do the evaluation,
the results can be very different from each other, depending on how we specify the initial configuration and how the lighting condition might change.
Even the friction parameters of any factor can make a huge difference in how robust your downstream policy is.
So this is very costly, and they have to wait for two days for the results to come back. And currently, there's very weak correlation
between the training loss and real-world success rates. So this is another very important caveat and difference
between supervised learning and also this kind of sequential decision making, this kind of policy learning is, for supervised learning,
your training loss directly measures how good your model is. But for this kind of policy learning,
your training loss measures how good this one-step prediction is, which sometimes may not be and, actually,
oftentimes is not indicative of the performance of policy over long task horizons, even if your loss is low.
But for long horizon task execution, your policy can actually be worse. And the training objective versus the task-specific metrics
like training versus test horizons are some of the reasons explaining why it is very hard to come up with even
approximate or approximate metrics to measure the performance of the policy. And people have to rely on real-world evaluations.
So then the question is, what about doing the evaluation in the simulated environments? There has been a lot of investigation,
for example, of behavior, which is done in physics lab here also at Stanford and also the Habitat 3.0 from Meta.
Now, people are trying to come up with this expensive simulated environments, trying to do evaluation and measurements of the robot
policies. And obviously, there has their own issues, especially with regard to sim-to-real gap.
How can you do very accurate simulation of rigid body, deformable object, and clothes? They have good correlations with the real-world performance.
And asset is also another major issue, where large-scale generalizations and generations
of those assets is a huge pain. I can elaborate but maybe after the lectures.
And also, how do you digitize the real world is an issue. And how to do procedural generations of realistic and diverse things are all issues
of using simulation to do evaluations for robot learning policies. And really, when you find the correlation between sim and real
and it's calling upon the ImageNet in Embodied AI, the reason why ImageNet was successful
is because, at least for a few years, any progress in ImageNet, meaning progress in deep learning and computer vision,
we want the same thing. We want to have this platform, meaning any progress on that benchmark or platform,
meaning progress in robot learnings. So that's something that we really want.
And I can maybe skip through. We talk about how to build this foundational policies that
can also be investigations on how to build a foundational world model. Especially, now, people are collecting
large-scale, action-conditioned robot interaction data to train this foundation policy. But there's a lot of dynamics knowledge
embedded in those data. If we just use those data to do policy learning, that would be such a waste. So we are also thinking about how can we
use this large-scale, action-conditioned robot interaction data that was already collected to train those foundational policy to train
this foundational world model and how they can do interplay between each other. And there are some existing works
that are thinking about along the direction of building this kind of foundational world models. And there's some very interesting characteristics you
might think about, like do you want it to be 3D? Do you want structural prior? How much learning versus how much physics?
And how you can correlate with the real physical world. And maybe, actually, I think we are about time.
So I will end it here. And this is the future we hope to achieve to really build
this foundational robotic model that can work very widely and generalize very well in the unstructured data
environments around us. And next lectures will be human-centered AI. And that will be the end of today's lecture.
Thank you so much.

Welcome to the last lecture of the quarter for CS231N,
and it was great to see you guys at the beginning and now at the end.
And this lecture is a little bit of a departure. We're not going to teach any new materials
in terms of algorithms. It's more a talk that I'd like to give to students to put
a perspective both on a more longer term research
evolution, but as well as another dimension that
is important to today's AI, which we would call it the human perspective. So for the completeness of the material,
there's a little bit of an overlap that you might see from other parts of this course,
but hopefully, it makes sense in a fuller way.
So the title of this slide or this lecture is what we see
and what we value, AI with the human perspective. And I know that some of you have already heard about this.
Is really the beginning, the origin of vision, both in terms of evolution as well as
in terms of our technology. And we did talk about the first slide
that came to the animal world back 540 million years ago.
And that was when animals or trilobites, to be specific,
developed photosensitive cells to glean
what the outer world is about. And according to zoologists like Andrew Parker, what
happened is that because of the onset of vision,
it set off an evolutionary arms race, where animals
either evolved or died. And that arms race gave rise to the speciation
or explosive speciation of animals, which now zoologists call the Cambrian explosion
or the big bang of evolution. And of course, you wouldn't be surprised
that vision is still to this day, a primary sensory intelligent system in many, many animals.
Not all animals use vision, admittedly, but many do. And that's also one of the primary sensory systems
for humans. And we use vision to do everything from survival
to work to entertainment to socialization to learning, development, and many other things.
So that's the recapture or summary of evolution.
And we also briefly talked about computer vision being a summer
vision project back in the 1960s as an attempt to use a couple
of undergrads to construct the significant portion of the visual system.
And that was very in line with the history of AI, where we tend to have clarity of the North Star,
but underestimate how long it would take. We are still probably experiencing that today,
but a lot has happened. You don't need me to tell you that from empowering
self-driving car to understanding images to the generative AI revolution, we're
seeing vision is playing a huge role, and also in many parts,
leading the wave. So maybe it's time to just take a different look at this
both historically and going towards the future. Is where have we come from, and where are we going?
And this is an important topic to discuss, because a lot of what has happened
will inform what will happen. So I'm organizing this talk in three chunks.
Is first of all, building AI to see what humans see.
And that's where we came from. That we were so inspired by human capability that we want to make machines that do the same.
And then we'll talk about building AI to see what humans don't see. And then we'll finish with building AI to see
what humans would like to see. Let's start with the first one. Building AI to see what humans see.
Again, just a little bit of a review. Humans are so good at seeing.
We know this. This is a very half a century old experiment showing us
that even watching a video you've never watched played at 10 hertz, which means every frame is only about
on the screen for 100 milliseconds, you've never seen that, it's still no problem for human eyes
to detect a target, in this case, a person. In this complex scene where you have no idea prior knowledge
about what this person is, it really underscores the superb ability of human visual understanding,
especially object-focused understanding. We also have briefly mentioned that around the turn
of the century, neurophysiologists are measuring the speed of vision in terms of humans
seeing complex objects in the form of brain signals, brain
electrical signals measured from EEG caps. And we see that differentiating or categorizing
animals versus animals is a very complex task, yet humans are capable of doing that at 150 millisecond
after the onset of the stimuli. And this is remarkable speed given the wetware
we have under our skulls. Also neurophysiologists have taught us
that objects is a very important functionality
in our visual intelligence in humans. So important that there are neural correlates in our brain.
Areas that are dedicated to object understanding, such as phase areas or place areas or body parts areas.
This shows that evolution has really spent time to hone in our visual intelligence skills
when it comes to object recognition. So all this built up the history for the field of computer vision
that a few decades ago, object recognition became a fundamental building block for visual intelligence.
And we want to empower machines with that. And in order to do that, we define the problem, or at least
the original problem as given an image, how do we empower, enable a computer to call out the objects
or what the object is in the image? That's such an effortless task for humans.
But if you think about it, now that you've learned enough computer vision to know that mathematically,
there's infinite possibilities to actually recognize
any object because of different lighting, texture, background, occlusion, viewing angle, scaling, and whatever,
you name it. So this is actually fundamentally a difficult task.
The history pre-deep learning is also very interesting. There were some pretty heroic attempts
at solving the problem of generic generalizable object recognition.
And the first wave of attempt was actually very inspired by psychology itself.
We self-introspect sometimes even to the detriment of over self-introspection.
We think that humans compose parts. We look at objects, we can see geometric parts,
and then we can compose them into different objects. And that idea of using predesignated parts or shapes
and to compose them in specific ways
was the first wave of object recognition. So these are different work or models coming from
the '70s, '80s, or even going all the way to '90s of using different parts and configurations to recognize
objects. Of course, it didn't really work. It's mathematically beautiful and simple, but it didn't work.
So a second wave of object recognition pre-deep learning
was actually a really important era in the field of AI.
Is really the beginning of machine learning. Statistical machine learning. It was the marriage between computer programming
and statistical modeling. And with that marriage, we start to realize
the world is so complex, these problems, these intelligence problems, whether it's visual intelligence or language
intelligence or other kinds of intelligence, in order to generalize, we need to learn the parameters.
It's very hard to use hand-tuned models to get good learning.
We now know we need data, even though we didn't at that time know how much data.
But we also know that we need to design or architect statistical models so that they have
the capability of learning through different learning rules. And because of that, we saw a blossoming of models in that era
where we're learning random fields or Bayes nets or support vector machines and all that.
And in fact, a lot of progress was made by the time we are
in the first decade of the 21st century in object recognition, that we even have international benchmarks of a small number
of object classes to encourage everybody to compare
their algorithms. So we're inching together. The last unlock for object recognition, as we have learned,
again goes back to cognitive science. So this particular psychologist, Irv Biederman,
had long conjectured that humans can recognize a huge number of objects.
And this is intuitive for our common knowledge. But he actually put a number on it.
I personally call it the Biederman number, which is that by age six or seven, children, he conjectured,
were able to recognize about 30,000 to 100,000 different
visual categories. And he used this-- where did he come up with? This number is a combination of looking at dictionary,
the number of nouns, as well as visual studies of how kids recognize different objects.
But it's a number that's pretty daunting and pretty sobering for the field of computer vision, because up till now,
this is middle of the first decade of 21st century, we were working with tiny number of object categories and a tiny
number of images to work with compared to what humans experience.
And this was, as you know, the motivation for ImageNet project, which took this number really seriously
and constructed-- we constructed this data set that is on par with what
the psychologist Biederman conjectured, which is around 22,000 object classes, over 15 million images.
And of course, that's the beginning that you start to come into this class.
Is that because of the large data provided by ImageNet, we start to see that powerful algorithms like neural network
at the beginning with convolutional neural network of course, now we use transformers and all that,
start to really show their power through big data.
And this is a generic slide for those people
who didn't learn about this. I'm going to skip this because you all know this. So the quick history is, as soon as we have ImageNet,
as soon as we use convolutional neural network, a few years after the beginning of ImageNet, we
saw this door blasted open in terms of solving the problem of object recognition.
Now, we have algorithms that we can take to look at any picture in the world
and be able to recognize objects in the big or small and in any kind of orientation.
Is it 100% soft? No. There is always a long tail problems we can solve.
But as far as industrial application goes, this has come a long way, and really has
been a matured problem. And of course, all of you know, and all this
came at a convergence point, which is the year 2012, where the ImageNet challenge provided the data
for the convolutional neural network, and they used two GPUs at that time.
And the three ingredients come together and brought the moment of deep learning--
the birth of deep learning. And in this class, we also talked a little bit
about different various architectures that ImageNet challenge engendered
throughout the past decade or so in terms of convolutional neural network or ResNet and so on.
So that's the beginning, really, about deep learning revolution.
And of course, in terms of the quest for visual intelligence, we're not going to stop at just being able to label objects
in a scene. For example, in this two scenes, if you just label objects,
you'll think it's just a llama and a person. But if I show you the second scene
with the llama and the person, the story is completely different. Even though you have the same object,
you have very different relationship. So cognitive scientists, once again,
was the head of computer scientist and inspired us to think about visual intelligence
beyond just naming objects or categorizing objects. In this particular paper, Jeremy Wolfe,
who is a pretty prominent psychologist, wrote this beautiful paper that called out
that relationships between objects must be coded as part of our understanding
of complex natural scenes. And inspired by that work, the field of computer vision
started to look at how do we understand relationships. And this is early work.
You guys got a lecture from Ranjay last week or--
yeah. Last week. This was his PhD thesis, looking at learning object relationships
using scene graph as a representation. In this case, scene graph is defined
by these entity nodes that are objects, and their relationships are defined
by the connectivity between the nodes, or sometimes they have attribute relationships that
defines the particular objects. And even a thing as simple as this
with mostly just two people, one feeding a cake to the other,
you can form a very dense scene graph because of the richness of the visual scene.
And this was Ranjay's thesis after the object recognition
error, where we build a data set called visual genome, where
we try to put together object relationships, also
story descriptions. And one of the work that Ranjay did I thought that was really fun was zero shot learning
of unusual object relationships. For example, it's not unusual to see person riding a horse.
It's not unusual to see person wearing a hat, but it's unusual in general, to see horse wearing hat.
And in the era of big data training, it's hard to get this kind of data
repeatedly because you just don't have too many of that. But using this compositional scene graph representation,
we're able to learn the more common relationships, and then derive uncommon relationships in that representation.
And again, this is another example of zero shot learning, where person sitting on chair and fire
hydrant on the lawn or on the field are all common relationships, but person sitting on fire hydrant is the one that would not--
it's hard to get data. And we're able to do that to make that happen. And this is just a figure from the paper that shows that
Ranjay's work at that time achieved state-of-the-art recognition rate compared to many other methods.
But relationship is not enough. The ability to actually tell a story that
is a lot more richer, or also using natural language is actually the next big goal.
So around the year 2014--
around 2014, we start working on that problem and think about it. That's just two years after the image that Alex, that moment.
But the field was starting to evolve so fast. We're so inspired by what we can do
using a combination of convolutional neural network
as well as a language model called LSTM. And this is the thesis by Andrej Karpathy
that we were one of the first teams that showed how to do image captioning or storytelling, as
well as dense captioning, which is also part of the work that Justin Johnson did.
And I know he's one of the co-instructors of this course. And that was around the time between 2015 to 2018.
A lot of work has happened to solve the problem. Of course today, using a multimodal LLMs,
we have taken the solution of this problem even to another notch.
But this is the beginning of that line of work. And frankly, I myself, as a computer vision scientist
who entered the field at the beginning of the century, was very surprised by how fast our field was able to solve
this problem, as soon as we've got data, as well as neural network algorithms.
But a much harder problem is actually in dynamic scenes. In dynamic scenes, we tend to have much more
complex relationships. Much more complex movements. And also the camera movement or the entity,
the actors within the scene can do a lot of different things. So in this work that a collaboration with Esan
and a bunch of students in our lab, we call it multi-object multi-actor activity
understanding. This is a much newer work. We only published this a couple of years ago.
To capture the relationship between these actors and their activities in dynamic scene is still,
I would say, an unsolved problem. And this will have profound implications.
You know that you're in Silicon Valley. So you're hearing so much excitement of robots,
for example. If we ever dream to have everyday robots that work amongst us, robots need to solve this problem.
Understand how complex the scene is, what people are doing, who is doing what, what is next.
And this is an unsolved problem.
Also in addition to what I have shown you, you have learned a little bit in this class and related computer
vision problem, but we didn't have time to elaborate. For example, 3D computer vision or human pose understanding.
And of course, generative AI and generative models. So this is just to show you that the field
of computer vision since the rebirth of modern AI has been just moving extraordinarily fast.
But the take home message in this section for me is that two things.
One is that data, compute and neural network algorithm truly have converged about 10 years ago or 13 years ago.
And that was the moment that modern AI or deep learning revolution has happened.
But the history of that, and so much of the problem that we have been working on, is truly inspired by cognitive science and psychology
and neuroscience. And that, to me, is going to continue to happen.
Is that we will continue to be inspired by what the brain can do or how the brain does things, and also
will continue to use AI to help our brain research. So there is a very intimate relationship between today's AI
and cognitive science, neuroscience, brain science, and all that. So that's the first section.
And of course, a lot of people, students and collaborators have contributed to what I have just presented.
Now, let's talk about going beyond just building AI to see what humans don't see.
This is where pushing AI beyond the capability of humans or you can call it super humans.
For example, most people don't recognize a ton of dinosaurs.
You can probably name a few. Some kids really can name a lot. Well, let alone thousands and tens
of thousands of bird species or tens of thousands
of car categories. So this is the line of work that I call fine-grained object
categorization. Humans are just not that good at it. And this is still a problem that I
don't think we're fully solved yet, to be honest. In this generative AI era, especially, we're
talking a lot about multimodal LLMs. This problem has somewhat been neglected,
or it just is not a mainstream problem. But it really will-- still will come and play an important role.
So in this early work of fine-grained bird species recognition, we put together, a data set--
actually, we used a data set of 4,000 birds. And as you can see, as we go down
the tree of the species, the errors, actually,
as we go up the species, as we have more general names,
the error decreases, which means it's a convoluted way of saying, by the time you're reading the fine-grained level,
we still make a lot of errors. The algorithm are still not totally ready.
Another work that I find fascinating is that a few years ago, a group of students in my lab
trained a fine-grained car classifier in terms of make, model, and year.
It turns out after 1970s, there are thousands of car models that
are defined by different make, model, and year. And then you can take--
we took Google Street View images from 200 or 100, I think,
major cities across the country. And then we use the fine-grained car detectors
to detect what are the cars on the street of these cities. And we use it as a lens to study social patterns.
For example, what is the pattern here, I showed education patterns.
Car models and education patterns are highly correlated or income patterns, highly correlated.
In that paper, we show voting patterns, highly correlated.
Or even environmental patterns, highly correlated. So it's a really interesting way of using computer vision
as a lens to study our society. And no human, no individual human, not even a collection of humans can do this easily at all.
So AI is really pushing the boundary of what humans can see.
To drive home this idea, let's do a couple of tests. Humans actually have our limitations.
I just talked about celebrating human's ability of seeing. But we also have our limitations. This is a very famous visual illusion
test called Stroop test. And the idea is that you all can read the words. But if I ask you to read the color of the word as fast
as possible, going from left to right and top to down, you find that it's not that easy.
Try to read it, like red, yellow, green, purple, blue,
black, orange. It's fighting with you. This is the fight between visual attention and all that.
Here's another example. There are two alternating images of the picture.
And there's one change. A pretty big change that's happening between the two
alternating pictures. I don't know if you spot the change. Do you spot it?
The enine-- Yes, it's the engine. So it takes a while to spot it.
So this is a very famous psychology experiment called change blindness.
Now, all this is fun. Stroop test is fun, this is fun. But this is not fun.
That human attention is limited. And in some situations in our working life,
that kind of attention limit can be dire. For example, medical errors are the third leading cause
of death in America's health care system. And of course, leaving this pair of scissors
in the body of the patient is the iconic image of medical errors. But there are so many medical errors.
Pharmaceutical errors, there's procedure errors,
clerical errors, diagnostic errors. So one has to be very careful.
For example, in surgery rooms, honestly, scissors don't get left in the bodies, typically, but much smaller
things like suture, needles, or piece of gauze and all that.
So today, most of this is still just tracked by hands.
We have these checklists to track in the surgery rooms.
If something is missing, the surgery has to be paused. On average, that pause is close to an hour.
And think about the danger for the patient. The exposure to bacteria and the bleeding
and all that, just because we have to search for that item. So if there is a way to use AI to help our doctors,
surgeons, to track items, that would be so powerful. And this is just a demo.
This is not a deploy system. We're not there in terms of fidelity. But this is a demo to show that we
can use AI to count, in this case, gauze and all that. And this is just an example of pushing AI
to see what humans don't see. Here's another example that is really fun.
I don't know if I showed this before. But this is one of my favorite visual illusions,
where I'm just giving you the answer. If you look at the two squares, A and B,
on a checkerboard at the top, it is so hard to believe they have the same grayscale or luminance.
And then you look at the bottom, you're like, oh. Of course, they do. But why? Even though you have the bottom picture in front of you,
seeing the top still gives you the illusion. Why?
Because evolution has pre-wired us in conjecturing or understanding our world in its common way,
with the common physics of the shape of objects, lighting source, how shadows are made, and all that,
this is so deep in our visual development.
That it's hard for us to see it another way.
So what I'm trying to get at is there's bias in our human visual system.
The bias might come from evolutionary construct, the bias can come from our social experience,
the bias can come from the data we're exposed to. But some of these biases can be harmful.
When the bias happens, that became unfair to a group of people.
A community. And we have to be aware of this. A few years ago, face recognition algorithm
was not good, and it tends to recognize certain skin color and even gender better than others.
And it has consequences. Think about self-driving car. So think about many other medical use cases.
So we have to be vigilant about this. I do believe that AI bias has been a problem that people now
are carrying. A few years ago, this problem was so new that many people are not even paying attention.
But fast forward to 2025, I'm not saying we have solved this problem, but I'm personally a lot happier to see
that so many people are paying attention to this, not only just in academia, but also in industry.
And then there's another kind of not seen. And this is interesting.
Sometimes not seen is exactly what we want because you want to respect privacy.
So how do you create AI that helps people to see yet
you still want it. Not to see what people don't want you to see. This is a very deep--
it's a technical problem as well as a human problem. So from a technical point of view,
there are many ways to consider ML, machine learning privacy. I'm just listing here from a visual approach point of view,
a few years ago, our lab wrote this paper about using smart cameras in patient rooms or patient homes
to help doctors to see better. But even there, we have to recognize issues
like faces or just full body information and even homes.
And this is a list of potential solutions. For example, you can do blurring, or you can do masking,
you can do dimensionality reduction, but you can also, try to do different approaches,
for example, federated learning so that you don't send all the data to the server, or encryption and other things.
So I'm not going to belabor this, but there's one work I want to show you. It's not even my work, but I really like this work.
And it's a work about taking videos of people
and try to recognize the action of people, but yet respecting the privacy of people.
How do you do that? For example, in this case, you want
to take a video of this kid moving in the scene. There are ways to do this.
If you blur this or defocus this or do some of these, yeah,
you can provide. You can protect privacy, but you also lose enough information that you might not even know what this person is doing.
And for many applications, the whole goal is to know what this person is doing. So in this particular work, led by Carl's students,
they actually did a combination of hardware and software approach, where they had-crafted a lens that
is that actually filters visual data in a particular way.
So particular that if you look at the top row,
what the lens captures into the camera protects the privacy a lot. You don't see the person's face, you
don't see the body and so on. But because it's a lens that's particularly
designed in connection with a piece of software, it can help to block out the movement information
or the human activity information without backing out phase information.
So that's a really interesting approach. That's a hybrid between hardware and software.
Aiming towards important applications that you want to see people to protect them,
but you don't want to see too much, because you want to respect privacy. So that's a work I really like.
I really like the spirit of that work. OK. So in this part of the lecture, I shared with you
a number of things, just considerations of building AI to see what humans don't see.
Sometimes we're pushing AI like fine grained recognition of birds to go beyond human ability.
Those are superhuman ability. Sometimes we know humans are not good. We have bias or we have attention issues.
And then we want to use AI to help us. And then sometimes we genuinely have situations
we don't want anyone to see. And then how do you use AI to continue to help without violating those privacy concerns?
So you can see that AI is a very interesting, powerful tool. It can both help but amplify us.
And if we have bias, if we have issues, AI can amplify us too. So when we build AI, it is so important
not only to take that technology perspective, but also to take the human perspective, to commit
to study forecasts and guide the AI to understand its human impact and respect human values.
So that's the second take home message. And again, a number of collaborators and students
participated in this work. OK. Now, let's talk about building AI
to see what humans want to see. And in fact, we're going to go beyond seeing.
We're going to connect seeing and doing together. So if you think about today's societal anxiety about AI,
one of the biggest anxiety is labor. A lot of headline news will say, labor is under threat.
Robots taking over jobs. The truth is, the picture is complex.
Denying job change is wrong. Every technological shift in human history
has caused labor market change, and some of them are very painful. Some of them can lead to even civil wars and wars.
But also, that change sometimes is inevitable. And a tiny digression.
A lot of the labor threat rhetoric that we have been hearing, think about physical labors.
But today, in the past two years, if you look at GenAI's impact is white collar jobs
that are drastically being impacted, especially software engineering and analytical work in offices.
So there's just definitely a labor change. But in the meantime, we also need
to recognize that AI I also can be helpful. We actually fundamentally have human labor shortages
in many situations, especially in elderly care, as well as health.
First of all, as modern medicine improves, human life expectancy increases.
And that is inevitably pushes a society towards longer living.
And that's a good thing. But in the meantime, we have shortages of laborers.
Young people need to work. That's how to make this society vibrant.
Economy vibrant. But who is taking care of our elderlies? Who are taking care of our chronically ill?
Even in America's hospitals, we have such a attrition of health care workers, especially nurses,
that we don't have enough hands, ears, eyes to help our patients.
So instead of thinking about this word replace, we actually can think about AI augmenting.
And you got a glimpse of that in my surgery room example. Indeed, in health, there's so many spaces in health
that we don't have enough pairs of eyes. And that's what I call the dark spaces of health.
From surgery room to patient room to pharmaceutical to homes
and so on. So how do we make AI help? And this is something that Ihsan has been
leading a ton of this work. Also with zing is that we have been looking
at this problem of ambient intelligence for health, where we combine smart sensors with machine learning algorithms
to glean health critical insights from these situations
in health set up so that we can alert the patients or family
members or doctors in time to help patients. And again, the fuller paper is in this particular paper
we published a couple of years ago. Let me just give you a couple of examples. One example is this hand hygiene project, which actually
started way before COVID. And hand hygiene turns out to be really important for keeping
hospital infection low. Hospital acquired infection is actually
one of the leading causes of American patients fatality in our hospitals.
It kills three times more people per year than car accidents
nationwide, and it is really hard to control. Most of these germs are passed from patient room
to patient room. And then they just brew together. So what do we do?
The hospitals try to use human auditors, but we just talked about, we don't even have enough nurses,
let alone hiring auditors. And also you cannot hire enough of them.
There are human fatigue. We just talk about human attention problem. So this is not a pretty prohibitive solution.
There were some technological solutions like RFID, put the badge.
If the badge or the person wearing the badge is close to the sink or the hand hygiene hand sanitizer
dispenser, it gives you the hint that the person, or most likely the doctor or the nurses is washing their hands.
But that's very nonspecific. You cannot guarantee. And the hospital rooms are pretty small,
corridors are small, and just standing next to something doesn't mean you're doing it.
So a few years ago, we did this project where we put smart sensors that protects privacy
by just only gleaning depth information like the blue screen or the blue video there.
And then we use computer vision algorithm to classify actions.
Is the person washing hand or not washing hand? And the result is that if you compare ground truth
with the algorithm output versus human outputs or human detection
results, you can see algorithm is so much better and more consistent than humans.
You have to almost show the same video to four humans
to get almost as good as AI, and this is just not plausible.
If it's one person, you can see how sparse the detection is, and that's not good.
So this is one application. Another application we worked on is his ICUs.
ICU is where patients fight life and death. ICU is also where 1% of US GDP is spent.
So making ICU as effective as safely as possible
is a top priority. One of the goals or the goal of ICU
is to get our patients safely out of ICU and go into step down units or even go home.
So one of the most important thing people have learned in ICU
is to help patients to move. Proper movement, which we call mobilization,
is actually important for recovery. But this is a very dicey situation. You have to get nurses to help.
Doctors have to give orders, and you have to move properly, and it has to be in different time, like designated time.
And you have to assess the movement and all this is not easy, right? So we collaborated with Stanford as well as Utah's Intermountain
Hospital to put these smart sensors in ICU units and help doctors to monitor patient movement,
in this particular case, four different kind of movements, getting out of bed, getting in bed, getting out of chair,
getting in chair. These things are so important for ICU patients. I know that for us it's a no brainer,
but this really is critical. And you can see that I can help to do the kind of detection
and prediction that is so helpful for doctors, especially when there's a labor shortage.
Last, but not the least example is aging in place. And this is just so important for many, many reasons.
People are seniors, want to live at home independently and healthily.
And I remember during the beginning of COVID when we had so much fatality among the aging seniors.
A lot has to do with hospital overrun and overtaxed hospital
system, so putting and keeping seniors safe and well in their homes is really critical.
And using smart sensors, we can help early detection of infection, especially
using thermal cameras or mobility, we just talked about in ICU, similar here
or understanding sleep patterns or understanding dietary patterns. All these are realms of possibilities
by AI and smart sensors. And then last but not least, what if there's still
labor shortage after smart sensors. The thing about smart sensors is that they are information
gathering system, but they cannot go there and help to turn
a patient or bring water and medicine pills to the elderly.
So this brings us to the last technical topic, which is embodied AI, or we would call--
large part of embodied AI is robotics. And this is where I find it extremely exciting
because it closes the loop between perception and action. And if you think about the Cambrian explosion of evolution,
when there's an onset of eyes animals start to move. So the area of robotics is where we
can close the loop between seeing and doing. But it's not easy, right? Robots, as much as we're very excited by them, still
are very, very slow. They are very, very clumsy. It's very hard for them to adapt to a generalizable situation.
And in today's robotic research, we as a field have made a ton of progress, and Stanford is definitely
one of the centers of robotic learning. But still, most of these work are constrained in their setup,
our short horizon tasks pick and place, and it has anecdotal setup and lack of clinical--
sorry, lack of standard benchmark. So let me just share with you a couple of work in our lab.
One work is, a few years ago, we're looking at how to bring robots to the wild.
If we have to predesignate the set of tasks, it's unsatisfying.
On the other hand, if you look at today's LLM, it's totally in the wild. You can talk about anything.
So my student want to learn and a few students want to close this gap. So this idea is that how do we give
an open instruction to a robot, any instruction without pretraining everything in a closed world and the robot
can do some tasks? So let's say your training set is open a door like that.
In the wild, you have doors like that. So how do you make some progress in that problem?
So the goal is, in the wild, generalization. And here is a result or overall algorithm.
I don't know if this is so glitchy, but whatever. What you're saying is we want to tell this robot
arm to open a drawer by planning a motion path that avoids
knocking down that flower. And all these instructions were not pretrained.
So what we do is actually we borrow the latest advances
in LLM as well as in visual language model. And the idea is that we use LLM and VLM to give us
an instruction set. And then we use visual language model to help us to recognize or understand the environment.
And then we turn that into a motion planning map so that the robotic arm can execute.
And because we're using LLMs as well as VLMs, we get rid of the problem of training robot in a closed world
and bring them to a more generalizable or in the wild. And the details is the instruction of open top drawer
comes in. LLM turns this into like literally codes.
And then because of these instructions like draw or handle, we send this information to a VLM model.
And that model detects draw and handle in the scene. And then because of that, it updates its information,
and then it updates a motion map. This is presented by a heat map to show you
where the robot arm should focus, where it should not focus, and with that, then you
give it another instruction, but watch out for the vase. Again, it goes through the same thing with LLM, writes the code
or generate the code, send it through a VLM model.
VLM model detects the object and then updates the motion planning
map. In this case, it's the negative, not the positive, because you want to avoid that.
And then combining with the previous map, you get a heat map of knowing where to avoid and where to go.
And eventually what we do is we do this for the motion planning
map. We do it for rotation to gripper, velocity, and then this is the result. Actually,
let me just show you this. This is the actual result of the robot.
And then we do this for many different tasks, right? We can do it for articulated object manipulation.
We can do it-- here just many different examples.
Napkins or sweeping the floor. What is this? Getting toast, setting up table, and also
dealing with online disturbances and so on. So this is one work.
Another work I want to just show you quickly is that overall robotics research is still lacking
good benchmark, and while we're still experimenting in the labs,
we know real world is so much more complex, so much more uncertain, have large variability,
is so interactive and social, and it has a lot of multitasking task.
And then we know that both natural language and computer vision has benefited a lot from setting up important large scale
data sets for both training and benchmark. So in our lab, we have been working on this project that
is towards an building an ecological robotic learning
environment and try to encourage researchers
to benchmark against a large and diverse set of activities. And that's the behavior of benchmark,
which is benchmark for everyday household activities in virtual interactive and ecological
environments. Now, here's a question because this lecture has a lot to do with human values is, who is to say
which tasks robots should do? I know that every graduate students who are working on robotics just want two tasks.
One is laundry, the other one is dishwasher. That's great, but moving beyond grad school, what are the tasks
we should get robots to do for us? So instead of us coming up with this task list,
we actually did a human-centered survey to ask robots--
or sorry to ask humans-- [LAUGHTER] --that what would you like robots to help you?
Let me test this. Would you like a robot to help you to clean the kitchen floor?
Say yes or no. OK, good. Normal people would say yes.
Shoveling snow? OK. Folding laundry? Yes. OK, good.
Cooking breakfast? No. Yes. See, we're getting mixture answers, right?
What about opening Christmas gift? No. Exactly. People are different.
I actually think robot can do this pretty well, but we don't want it.
One of the tasks we ask is buying wedding rings. Can you imagine that? So what we did is actually-- we want
to respect human preference. So we took a bunch of government surveys
from a labor office in the US and Europe and so on,
and put together thousands of everyday activity tasks.
And then we went online to find people. We want to be as diverse as possible,
but I think we have room to improve. But we found 1,400 people.
And to answer these tasks and tell us which tasks they want robots to help, and then we rank that.
And you can see that just like grad students, people want robots to help with cleaning, a lot of cleaning,
toilet cleaning, floor cleaning, but people don't want robots to play squash for you, or to buy a wedding ring,
or to even mix baby cereals. There is a lot of tasks that matters to us as humans, emotionally or socially or whatever.
So our goal is first we have a principled way to decide which
are the 1,000 tasks that we want to train robots for, and those
are the tasks that humans prefer to get help. And with that in mind, we have to actually build
a virtual environments. So we scanned or acquired 3D scene from 50 different real
world environments from restaurants to apartments to grocery stores to offices and so on.
And then we acquired, this number is actually outdated,
we acquire more than 10,000 object assets, 3D assets that has a lot of properties,
whether it's articulation, deformability, and all those properties.
And then we have to build a simulation environment. A lot of people have built simulation environment.
Let me just fast forward. But our particular simulation environment was a collaboration with NVIDIA's Omniverse group.
And we were going for building a physically, perceptually, and also interactively
high-quality simulation environment, and this especially
taking account, for example, physical effects like thermal transparency, deformability and so on.
We also tested our behavior environment against other environments in terms of perceptual realism
from human user study. And here are some of the examples
of physical interaction, such as cloth or liquids and so on.
So there's a lot of nuance that has gone into this work. And let me just fast forward, and these are some benchmarks
we did compared to other work. OK. Let me just fast forward.
So this is an ongoing work actually in our lab, and because of this, we are using behavior
to help us to learn robotics, to help us, actually, to push us to gather more interesting data
and also to use that for even cognitive studies.
Let me just fast forward.
One thing I want to share with you is that-- let me just share these numbers, is today's algorithm still
cannot do behavior tasks. And of all these roles, the top role
is what we wish robots can do. Give them no privileged information.
They have to be dropped in an environment and do these tasks. And we benchmarked three behavior tasks
using today's robotic algorithm. And the performance is just zero.
And once you start to give more privileged information
or make assumptions that make the task simpler, like magic motion or a perfect memory and all that,
things start to get better. If you look at it, only look at the top row,
you get pretty depressed by today's robots. But as a grad student, I hope you're inspired because that means we have a lot of room to grow.
OK. These are just different papers from our lab. I'm going to actually fast forward because I think
we've talked enough about this.
Well, by the way, we're also doing digital twin of behavior
in the digital environment as well as in the real-world environment, and that's
a great way of testing real to sim transfer. Again, this is an unsolved problem.
And there's a long way to go. And in this particular case, we're
showing you that this robot, without speeding up, you can see how slow it is.
It's trying to clean up this room.
OK. Hooray. This is actually some of the mistakes
that this robot makes in-- for example, it cannot pick up the bottle,
or earlier it just went the wrong way and placed it
in the wrong place. So there's still a lot of mistakes. OK, let me fast forward.
We're actually we're also using this environment to study visually impaired patients,
and this is a great way of putting patients in a safe environment to study.
One last thing I want to show you is really super cool, and this is the last technical work I want to show
is that we also now are collaborating with psychologists
and doctors to study how we can use brain waves to control
robots. So what you're seeing here is a demo where a grad student, I think, is wearing this EEG cap,
and that just is sending instructions, and the robotic arm is cooking a Japanese meal purely
from thoughts. There's no invasive brain control. This is from electrical signals.
What we have to do is to pretrain these thoughts. You have to pretrain the robotic arm with, say, lift or place
or drop or whatever. And once you do that, this is an entire meal
cooked based on the wave. This is really sci-fi. And this has happened last year.
So I'm pretty excited by where all this is going, combining
vision and perception and robotics and also helping people in clinical settings.
This is really the future of this is helping severely paralyzed patients.
OK, so behavior project is really aimed at augmenting people.
It's a large scale diverse benchmark. And it has realistic and ecological physics
and perception. And the last take home message is
that we not only want to build AI to just do things or see things, we really want to build it to help people.
AI being an augmentation tool or enhancing tool for humanity
is very important instead of a tool that replaces.
