Alright, so now we are at least going to get started with setting up a simple linear regression example.
The first thing that we need to make sure we have is scikit learn, Pandas and Quandl. So open up terminal, command prompt, whatever.
And pip install sklearn. pip install quandl. And pip install pandas.
Once you have all those, you are good to go. So to install those, go ahead and pause the video and pick back up once you have them.
Ok, so once you have those, let's go ahead and get started with a simple example. So we are starting with regression,
and the idea of regression is to take continuous data,
and figure out a best fit line to that data.
and basically with that just boils down to
we are trying to like "model" your data
and the way we do that with regression at least with simple linear regression
is just with a straight line so the equation of the line as we will talk more about down the line
but as you might remember from school, y=mx+b,
so if you have x, you can figure out what y is, also if you have m and b.
So basically the whole point of regression is to find out what m an b is.
So for example, a lot of people use regression with stock prices so that's what we are gonna do
at least in this one.
And, so the idea is, this is continuous data and you've got months and months of stock prices and
and each price is in its own kind of unique day.
But all the data is kind of one dataset together as opposed to with like classification,
where each group of data has its own unique label.
So with machine learning, basically everything boils down, at least with supervised machine learning,
everything boils down to features and labels.
Features are like your attributes, or in this case, the continuous data.
So, let's go ahead and get started and we'll talk a little bit more about features.
So first of all, let's go ahead and import pandas as pd.
And then we are gonna import Quandl with a capital Q.
And then what we are gonna say is df for dataframe
equals Quandl.get and we'll put in the ticker.
You can get this from quandl.
So if you just go to quandl.com
You can use a little search and find stuff like
if I say google stock
we can probably find it.
Let's see I am trying to find, we are using the wiki dataset
Let's just do free. Anyway, when you find it you can find
all kinds of different datasets here but we are looking
just simply for the wiki one.
Here it is.
You will pick up a dataset and you can
come over here
You can either just download here or more importantly
here is the quandl code and then you can click on like
python and this is the exact statement to get it.
If you have an account, you can make basically unlimited
request free data. If you don't use an account,
like we are not gonna use an account here,
like we are not gonna use an auth token.
If you don't have an account, I think, it's limited like 50 calls a day.
We are actually only use quandl fairly short term here
and then maybe later on. So you really don't
need to create an account, but if you like quandl,
you might as well make an account at some point.
So anyways, quandl.get and then wiki/google was the ticker there
so then we can just simply print
let's print the df.head
just so we can see what it is we are working with.
We'll see that basically each column here
is a feature.
So the open, high, low, close, these are features.
So in machine learning you can have all the features you want but you want to have meaningful features
features that actually have something to do with your data
So some people are pretty avid believers in the ideas like
pattern recognition with stock prices
and that might be you but
do you need every single one of these
open high low close columns to do
pattern recognition? No.
Also, you would know we've got
open high low close volume and then adjusted
and adjusted is adjusted after a thing like stock splits
so a stock split
maybe your company has 10 stocks
and each stock is $1000 a share
and you decide I want people to be able to buy shares of my company for less than $1000
So you might say, ok, BAM,
every share is now two shares
so we have 20 total shares and the share price is $500
so you have adjusted prices to account for that
so it doesn't like like the stock price went from $1000 to $500
so that's what adjusted is
so we are gonna be using those
but again, each one of these is really related to the other one
like the correlation of these two columns is super high
so would you use each one of these columns
Does that the next one really brings that much meaningful data? No
but one thing to always think about
when you have features and labels is maybe like
what about the relationship between those columns
so when we get into something like deep learning and then some of the other algorithms
you can start to discover relationships between attributes
but with regression, just simply no.
what you wanna do
you wanna like simplify your data as much as possible.
You want as many meaningful features as you can get
but useless features as we'll show kinda through this series
can really cause a lot of trouble for your machine learning classifiers
especially the more simple ones in supervised learning and so on
anyways let's close out of this and let's go ahead and grab some features
what we're gonna say
first we are gonna pair this down,
we are gonna say dataframe equals the df
and then we are going to create a long list basically all of the columns that we wanna have
so we are gonna take adjusted, open, and then I'm just gonna go ahead and copy this
copy, ok
so that's adjusted, open, and then we are gonna take
oepn, so high, low, close, and volume
ok so now we have just these columns so we
kinda recreated our dataframe to just be the open high low close and volume of the adjusted ones.
so then, like I was saying, some of these columns are relatively worthless
but they do have some relationships
so for example, like what is interesting about high and low
is the margin of high and low tells us
a little bit about volatility for the day
Also, the open price that's the starting price for the day
and it's relationship to the close price
tells us did the price go up
if so, by how much
and did it go down? If so, by how much and so on.
so the relationship there is very valuable.
But a simple linear regression is not gonna seek out that
relationship. It's just gonna work with whatever
features you feed through it
so what we need to do is define those special relationships
and then use those as our features rather than
redundant almost prices that not gonna really give us
anything else very useful
first let's do the high minus the low percent
so this is like the percent volatility almost
so we are gonna define a new column
we are gonna call it HL_percent
and then that is going to be
I'm having a hard time here
that's gonna be equal to
so percent change is
in this case it would be the high minus low
divided by the low times 100
so for us it would be df Adj high minus the df Adj close
and what's happening here is just on a per row basis
which is just this column minus this column
so that column divided by df Adj close and then times 100
you can either times by 100 or not
the classifier really is not gonna care about that
we are just doing that for ourselves
So that's the high minus low percent
and then we actually want just the daily percent change
like the daily move
so I'm just gonna copy that whole line, paste
and then we are gonna call this one percent_change
and that is equal to pretty much the same thing only we need to change some stuff
so normally percent change is new minus the old divided by the old times 100
so that would be adjusted close minus adjusted open
so new minus the old
divided by the old times 100
oh, I am sorry, ha, we did it the wrong way.
divided by the old, so this would be open times 100
so that's percent change.
actually, you can pass close here again
the classifier doesn't really care as long as everything kinda normalized
but yea so either way would been fine
this is the actual way you should do it anyways
once we have that data
we are gonna define a new dataframe
and we are instead gonna say
so it's gonna be df equals df[]
and then now we define the only columns that
we really acutally care about
and so in our case the columns we care about are gonna be
adjusted close, the high low percent, the percent change
and then volume is also somewhat useful to have
so volume is just how many trades were occurred basically that day
so volume is also kinda related to volatility
so you can also make more features with some sort of relationship there
but we'll try to keep this pretty simple
so for now we'll just print df.head
and we wait just to make sure everything worked out
and sure enough it did
so we have all the numbers we are kinda interested in
so we got our features and eventually
this will actually wound up being, possibly, our label
but we'll get to..., I guess think about
between now and the next tutorial
features are the kinda of the attributes that make up the label
and the label is, hopefully, some sort of prediction
into the future
so will the adjusted close, will this column,
actually be a feature? or will it be a label
as it stands right now.
so think about that and the next tutorial
we'll pick it up and start getting closer actually
making real predictions with this data
so if you have any questions, comments, whatever, leave them below
otherwise, as always, thanks for watching, thanks for all the supports, subscriptions and until next time

Alright hello everybody and welcome to the third machine learning and second regression tutorial video.
Where we left off, I was asking whether or not the adjusted close column would be a feature or a label.
And the answer is really a feature and possibly none of the above.
Um... It could be a label if we hadn't already kind of decided that we are using the high minus low percent
um... or the percent change.
For example so, you could use adjusted close as a label if,
say, at the beginning of the day you were trying to predict what the close might be that day.
But in this case with the given features that we have chosen, you really wouldn't even know this value.
Um, you wouldn't know the high minus low
and you wouldn't know the percent change
until the close had already occurred.
So, if you trained a classifier to predict this value,
um, that would be an incredibly biased classifier.
So, just kind of you have to start thinking of these things.
Is this even possible in the real world?
Cause you can kind of find yourself doing things
uh that seem like a great idea at the time, but then it's actually not even possible to do.
So, in our case, adjusted close will either be a feature,
or not, none of the above in the sense that actually what we will do
is take like the last 10 values of the adjusted close and that's a feature.
And, that's most representative of when we actually go and dig in and write the algorithm ourselves
, um, you would take maybe the last 10 values, and try to predict the future value.
Anyway, more on that later.
So the last, uh the last tutorial we did features, and now in this tutorial we are gonna define a label.
So, since I just got done telling you that this is not gonna be a label, what actually would be the label?
Well, it would be at some point in the future, the price. Okay.
And the only price column we have anymore is adjusted close.
Um, but what we wanna do is actually get the adjusted close in the future
, maybe the next day, maybe the next 5 days, something like that.
So, we need to bring in some new information, basically to get that information up into the future.
So, let's go ahead and close this out and begin working on that.
So, first of all, um we want to..., we are gonna take,
we are not gonna print the head anymore.
And, first of all, the,
we are gonna say forecast_column or col,
is just gonna be equal to adjusted close.
I'll explain why we are gonna do that in a second but basically it's just a variable
and later on, you could change this variable to be a different forecast column.
So, you might not be working with stock prices,
there's other things that you can use when you are regression on, of course machine learning
other than stock prices.
So, in the future, if you aren't, you're gonna just, you'll be able to use very similar code.
You'll obviously change the code leading up to this point,
but you just change forecast column to be whatever you want it in the future.
And I'll show you why when we get to the code, why that's gonna be useful.
Um now, what we're gonna say is just in case there is not, not, uh missing data, so df dot fill na.
So fill na is just fill any, as for not available or
in pandas term it's gonna be actually a na in most cases and that's not a number.
So now we are gonna fill na with a specific value
we're gonna do - 99,999 and we're gonna say inplace equals true.
So with machine learning, you can't work with na data.
So you actually have to replace the na data with something and,
or you can get rid of that entire column,
but you don't want to get rid of data in machine learning
in the real world you actually will find that you miss a lot of data.
You are lacking maybe one column, but you have got the other columns,
and you don't wanna sacrifice data if you don't have to.
So you can do this and it will be treated as an outlier in your dataset.
And again this is just one more reason why going through and doing the algorithm by hand.
will help you understand so much better what kind of effect that is gonna have on the algorithm.
So, you'll be thankful that we go through it.
And then basically you'll learn through each algorithm why,
uh..., what doing something like that will do?
So anyways, that's the choice, that's the best choice in my opinion rather than getting rid of data.
Now, we are gonna forecast out. This is a regression algorithm, generally you use regression to forecast out.
You don't have to but generally that's what you are doing.
So I am gonna define forecast out as the equal to being the int value of math dot ceiling, um, and the ceiling will be point 1 times the length of the df.
So, first of all, what are we doing there? And also we need to import math. But, first, what are we doing there?
math dot ceil will take anything and get to the ceiling.
So let's say the length of the dataframe was a number that was gonna return a decimal point, that was gonna be like point 2, right?
Let's say that was gonna happen. Math dot ceil will round that up to 1. So, math dot ceil rounds everything up to the nearest whole
So, um, and then we are making it an integer value, um,
just so, cause I think math dot ceil returns a float and we don't really want it to be a float either.
But anyway, uh, this will be the number of days out, so basically what we are gonna do here
is we are gonna try to predict out 10 percent of the dataframe and you'll see that actually when we go out and do this,
it's not like you'll just get 1 point 10 percent out,
you can get tomorrow's price and the next days price and so on.
Um, you're just using data that came 10 days ago to predict today. Ok.
So, um, feel free to change that, right? Maybe you want point 01, right?
Maybe you want to just predict like tomorrow's price or something.
You can play around with that if you want. We are just making stuff up basically as we go. So if you wanna change that, by all means change it.
So let's go ahead and go to the top and import math before we forget.
Okay, so now, we need a, the actual, so we've got labels,
oh I am sorry we have got features, right? these are features, or these are our features
and now we need that label, so now that we have forecast out we can create that label.
So we're gonna say df, and then the label column.
The label will be the equal of df forecast column,
so that's why we used forecast column. that way if later on you decide to change something
you'll be able to just change this variable rather than all the feature variables.
So it'll be equal to the df forecast column and then we are gonna do a dot shift minus forecast out.
That's why we needed it to be an int cause we are basically shifting the columns.
So, what we've done is we are shifting the columns negatively.
So it'll go, basically if you have a column here it'll get shifted up,
the spreadsheet almost.
This way, each row, the label column for each row will be adjusted close price 10 days into the future.
Okay? So that's our label,
so our features are these attributes of what, in our mind, may cause the adjusted close price in 10 days to change or 10 percent.
So actually this will be much greater than 10 days cause we didn't even specify the timeframe
So, we can tinker with this number later, it's really not that important. Um, regression,
you aren't gonna get rich on just this algorithm, I promise you.
But it's actually good, you'll find this actually not a bad model of stock price. And as you add more useful features, it can get, it can get pretty good.
But, anyway, um, so now we have our label column and let's go ahead and print df dot head again.
So this just prints like the first 5 rows of the dataframe.
Again if there's anything we are doing with pandas that you are like "What's going on?". Ask and
I can point you to tutorial because I've got I've done tutorials based on everything that I am gonna be doing.
Um, ok, so these are, our each of these column features and then we finally have a label column that we've kind of,
this is time into the future, um, for our data.
So, now what we're gonna go ahead and do is...
in fact let me do a df dot, let's do a df dot tail and also let's just do a df dot drop na and then in place equals true.
Cause those are some awful high numbers, for 10 percent out. Interesting.
So I guess prices changed that much by that shift.
So let's try a smaller shift. Um, fascinating,
that that would be 10 percent out.
That's a little better.
Maybe, maybe we'll use that point 01.
Let's use that one, cause the other ones were just so huge.
So let's go back to head and see if, if that number.
So if, if you are not following, I am just comparing the forecast price to the adjusted close price.
So of course when the when the stock price opens, this is actually a significant percent change, right,
from 50 to 66,
but the stock just came out and of course google does very well in time.
So, so yeah, but anyway, yeah I think I'll go with point 01 for now. Or oo oo we'll, we'll mess with bot whenever we go to predict some stuff
Anywway. That's it for this one. So we have done features, we got our label
and now we're actually ready to train, test, predict and actually run this algorithm on some realistic data so
Stay tuned for that. If you have questions, comments, concerns, whatever up to this point
Feel free to leave them below. Otherwise I was allways thankfull whatch these instructions and it's till next time.


What is going on everybody welcome to the [fourth] machine learning and third regression tutorial where we left off we had defined
Our or at least figured out what [our] features in our labels were we haven't quite [yet] defined them, but in this one
We're going to define them
We're going to actually pass them through to a classifier train and test that classifier to see how we do
So before we get started let's go [ahead] make some imports [also]
I'm just going to put kwan Deland math on the same line now
We're going to go ahead and import numpy as NP numpy is just a nice
Computing library it's going to allow [us] to use arrays python doesn't actually have arrays, but numpy will let us do that
Also from Sk Learn we're going to import
Pre-processing this gives us quite a few things, but we're actually going to be using the scaling
scaling your data aspect is usually done [on] the on the features and
The goal is often to get your features to be between somewhere between negative 1 and a positive 1 this can just help with
Accuracy as well as just processing speed or how long it might take to actually do the calculations
When we get there?
I'll explain why you may actually just either
Choose not to do pre-processing or maybe it's just [too] you know too tedious to incorporate it in reality, but anyway
We'll show it because it exists and it can be useful
Next is cross-validation
We're going to use cross-validation to create our training and testing samples. It's just a really nice way to split up your data
into
it'll shuffle your data for you, and which helps with that with
Statistics basically so you don't have a biased sample [and] then also it helps separate your data
It's just nice time-saver basically and we're also going to bring an SVM
[that] we're not to the support vector machine part, and we're not I'm not going to explain support vector machines just yet
We will get there, but you can use an Svm to do regression
and this is probably we are probably not going to come back to regression, so
We'll just show it as an example using it.also
It's useful because I'll show you how [frigging] simple it is [to] change the algorithm that you're using so anyways Svm
Next we're actually gonna bring in regression so from Sk learn
dot
Underscore Model Import Linear Whoops linear
Regression okay now. We are [ready] [to]
Rhumble so the first thing that we're going to go ahead and do is define our x and y [so] generally features and labels are
Defined features will be a capital x labels will be a lowercase y x is going to be equal to numpy array
of
Df Drop and we're going to drop
the
Label Column right, so your features are basically everything
Except for the label Column and we can do this because df drop
Returns a new data frame so it's returning a new data frame. It's can being converted to [a] numpy array
it's being saved to the value of x
Now the value of y is our labels, so you might be able to surmise that we're going to say Mp. Dot array
df
label
easy enough
Okay, so now we're going to scale x so x equals
pre-processing dot scale
X okay now think about it. So here
We're scaling x before we feed it [through] the classifier, but let's say we feed it through a classifier
We have a classifier, and then we're using it in real time on real data
well, let's say you're reading in that data and
You feed it through your classifier, but before you do that. You really have to have scaled it and to scale it
It's all scaled together, so it's like normalized with all the other data points
So in order to properly scale it you would have to include it with your training data
So keep that in mind if you ever go into the future and you're actually using this you need to scale the new values
But not just scale alone, but scale them alongside all your other
values, so this can add action while it can help with the training and testing it can actually add to processing time especially if
You're doing like any sort of like for example, but with using stock prices
You're doing like high-frequency trading you would almost certainly skip this step, but anyway
There's that now we're going to redefine x as being equal
to x
to the point of where [we] got where we were able to forecast underscore out [+1]
So this is is it includes all the points because remember we shifted to you know this point zero [one]
You know so [that's] like
What [1%] basically so we made [that] shift so we just want to make sure that we only have x's where we have values for?
y and
so we do that, and then we're going to say d f dot drop in a
in
place equals true, and then we're going to do we're going to Define [y] is equal to np [r] [a]
df
label and
Let's go ahead and let's print
Lem of X and then len of y, so, just make sure we have the correct lengths here
right so we don't have the correct [lengths] so let's close this and
Really probably at this [point]. So we actually may not need to have this let me rerun that real quick
So I'm thinking yeah okay, so so because we won't have [a] label for
The reason why I was doing this shift initially was because we wouldn't actually have labels
But we dropped those labels here are those those rows here? So we didn't need to do what we were doing there, okay?
so we've got our x's on our y's and
We don't need this hopefully
Okay, so now what we're ready to do is create our training and testing sets, so we're going to say x underscore
Train x
underscore
Test why Underscore train why underscore test?
equals
cross-validation
dot train underscore test underscore split and
What you're going to pass through here is the x's the y's and then how big of a test size
Do you want and we're going to do point two so [20%] of the data?
We want to actually use as testing data
so again what this is going to do is is going to take all our features on our labels remember kind of the order it's
going to shuffle them up right keeping x's and y's
Connected right so it's not going to shuffle them up to the point where you lose
Accuracy, so it shoves them up, and then it outputs
for x training Data wide training Data x testing data and y testing data so x training y train we use to
Fit our classifiers, so let's do that next so first we're going to need to find a classifier
so we're going to say classifier equals, and we'll use linear regression to start and
Then to fit or train a classifier. Just see a left fit and you fit
features and labels, so which ones should we use well we would use the x
Train and y train
Now we've got our classifier. We can [actually] use this classifier to predict into the future do all kinds of crazy stuff
But first we probably should test it, right
200C is so now what we would say is Cl. F dot score
so fit is synonymous with train score is synonymous with test, so we'll use x
Test y test so real quick why might you want to train and test on separate data?
Well if you train a classifier to predict based on the same data that you test against when you go to test it
It's going to be like I've already seen this information, so I know exactly what the answer [is] right
So that's not good. You don't want to do that. It's no different than if [you] know if you were in school, or whatever and
you were
The same questions that you were asked in
Class were the exact identical questions on a test right if you missed those then you just weren't paying attention or something
So here we have our score and what we're going to say is
Thence equals Cl f. Dot score you could also maybe replace confidence with accuracy
accuracy
that's probably a better choice because confident you not only you can kind of get to values not necessarily from this one, but
As we go into the future
[you] can actually compute both accuracy and confidence
As two different values so we'll go ahead and keep accuracy there and let's print
Accuracy, so let's save and run that
wait for root and
the accuracy that we got out of this is 0.96 so
[ninety-six] percent accuracy on predicting what the price would be
Shifted one percent of the days, so this would be let's go ahead and print
Forecasts out so we can see what that value actually is
So with linear regression just four just so you know
The accuracy is going to be the squared error, and we'll talk about that
Coming up next as we break down. How linear regression actually works, so this is actually still 30 days in advanced
So it's pretty interesting that you'd still be that accurate [but] okay
[so] it's okay. Yeah
so now
what if though
[A]
Couple things first of all its squared error, so this this actual percentage of accuracy is not
Necessarily like [you] would get rich off this algorithm. It's almost like
Maybe directionally accurate, but that's actually that's pretty darn pretty darn accurate
So let's say though remember. I what we also brought in Svm. Let's say we wanted to use the
support vector regression, which is not
Simple linear regression, so we're not going to actually break down, but what if we wanted to use [a] [different] algorithm?
So we're using linear regression. Here's how easy it is to switch our algorithm SvMs
B are
done
so now we're testing a new algorithm, and
This one does actually [a] lot worse wow let's run that more time. Let's see if it still is inaccurate
Yeah, wow
That's that's interesting. That's a huge difference
[anyway], you will actually kind of find that that happens now
for example [in]
With machine learning like with support vector regression for example you have these things called Kernels
So you might say Kernel kernel equals. I want to say the default is
linear so let's try a polynomial
Kernel so you can change these Kernels in there?
And you can kind of fiddle with [it] and see if you could get better values. [oh] my gosh, so
51% accuracy is like just barely better than average or better barely better than like clique coin toss
Let's see if we can actually get under 50
No, wow, that's that's a significant Variance. Oh goodness
Anyway, as we can see [it's] [e] support vector regression is not what we're going to be using in this case anyways
But so here's another decent example about why you'd want to follow this tutorial series though like what's a Kernel [alright]
So we'll be explaining. What a kernel is when we get to support vector machines, but anyway
what this was meant to show is how easy it is to switch between
clatter
Algorithms and this is the case whether you're doing regression, or whether you're doing classification or clustering you can switch out rhythms really quick
So you you definitely want to like test the algorithms oops do we do oh Svm linear regression?
Okay, so anyways. There's that one more thing to talk about
Before I let you guys go is
with the various algorithms you'll want to check the
documentation so let me pull up the documentation for linear regression for example and
What you're looking for is which algorithms can [be] threaded
So in this case
we [are] looking for and
Underscore jobs this the question is how many jobs can we perform at any given time and so?
Right now it may not be totally obvious to you. Why?
with
Let's say linear regression
We can thread the heck out of linear regression as opposed to a support vector machine where?
There are ways that you could do it
You could like do it in batches or something there are ways that you [could] do it
But it's just not inherently as easy as something like regression is to thread it
Massively and run it in huge parallel operations, but with regression. It totally is and you'll see why
Later on but anyway, so yeah
So this is just so if if you were following along, and let's say you're skipping the true breakdowns shame on you
but but to find out if it really quickly if the algorithm
Could be threaded you would just go to the page right you can just search linear regression support vector machine on Google
You'd find yourself on this page, and you're looking for N
Jobs, so this just means how many jobs how many threads are we willing to run at any given time?
So the default let me think here so the default for regression is actually 1
so this means it's running in I
Hate to use the word linear here, but it is running linearly right whereas we could run it in parallel by doing N
Jobs equals, and you could say okay?
[I] want to run at least ten jobs at a time
so I will run ten jobs at a time and in theory the training and testing part actually I'm sorry just the
Training part would be significantly faster
[or] you can use negative one and this will just run as many jobs as
As possible by your your processor
so
Anyway speaking of which processor wise as you follow along this series if you get to a point where like I'm getting it really fast
And you're going really slow like if you're following on like an older computer or a laptop or something like that
[it] may take you a little longer to run some of these things this one should [be] pretty quick
But it's conceivable especially when we get into like deep learning you might want to think about
Spinning up a server or something like that, but that's obviously way down the line
Well, we'll talk about it when we get there. I suppose, but just keep that in mind
So anyways just remember this, but then again just one more
Plug about why you'd want to dig in deep which we're about to be doing is
To understand which algorithms you can do this with so exam for example with deep learning
Like linear regression, not just in deep learning like all the algorithms really. There's a lot of regret a lot of like linear
Algebra that goes in because a lot of these things can be
Super threaded and you can run many operations at once and like so as we grow [in] processing power that becomes very useful to have
Calculations and methodologies that can that can scale like that
Anyway, that's it here in the next tutorial. We're going to be talking about predictions into the future
Using Scikit-learn and then after that we'll actually going to be breaking down linear regression and doing it ourselves
so stay tuned for that if you have questions comments concerns or whatever up to this point feel free to leave them below otherwise as
Always thanks for watching thanks for all the support and subscriptions, and it's he'll next time

What's going on Everybody Welcome [to] the fifth machine Learning and Fourth Regression tutorial in This Tutorial?
We're Going to be Building on the last one Where
We created This Linear Regression Algorithm We Found that it's got great Accuracy and all that
And now we're Ready to actually Predict like out Into the Unknown right
[so] it Turns out we [Actually] Already do have some Unknown Data Simply Because
We're Forecasting out this Shift right Which was About 30 Days
So, we Can [actually] Work with that so what we're Going to do is where We define our?
our
[X'S]
Let's do The Following Let's Actually cut this Come Down here Paste [and] we're Going to Take this drop in A cut-And-Paste
[and] Now I am reminded why, I was doing that negative forecast out so
So what, we're Going to do Is x?
Equals x to
[The] Negative [4] [cast] out
um
[Colt] Let's See Negative 4 Cast out to [the] point of Negative 4 cast out
And then, we're Going to Say
We're Going to do x
Underscore [Lately]
Equals x to the Minus 4 cast out Comp :
and
Then we're Going to Drop?
The Missing Data When, We go to create the labels this way, We have Both our X'S and our x Lately?
[Defined] so the x Lately Basically is the stuff that, we're Going to Actually Predict against so we have the x'S and then
We just need to figure out what the M and the B. Is right for y. Equals Mx plus B
We get the answer for y. We've done Linear Regression so?
So, we're Going to do it against These Lately X's that we Actually don't have a [Y-Value] for which is why?
We were not Training or Testing on that Data?
So now, We have our x lately so the next thing that
We're Going to go [ahead] and do is Basically, we?
Down Here and Actually it's going to run this Really quick [Just] to Make Sure, we're Still Actually getting the Accuracy
We don't have an incorrect number of values okay?
Now, We don't so we're Good so we've got [96%] Accuracy awesome so we'll Come down We'll comment this out?
We don't Really need That Anymore [and]
Now to Predict stuff [what] you Would do Is and also Make Sure we Scale See so?
What we need to do is take this?
Almost Made a Mistake There and This
Now Let's run that One More [Time] I make Sure I didn't
Screw Anything Up
Good, ok, so now, we're going to do, Is we're Going to come Down Here and
We need to Predict based on the x Data so the Way that
We can do this Once You have a classifier doing a prediction is Actually super Easy so
We're Going to Say forecast set
Equals Cl. F dot Predicts and Then Here you [can]
[Actually] Pass A single value or you can
Pass Like an Array of values to Predict Make a Prediction per Value in That Array and that's what
We're Going to do right we've got this heat This 30 Days of Data Basically right Here
So uh
X lately rather so 30 Days here okay so it's the last 30 Days so x Lately
We want to Create That With x lately so then, We have our forecast set so now We can, do we Can Print?
Forecast Set
Forecast Set Confidence and
Forecast out just so we [know] how Many Days were Forecasting out Here
This Up
[Bo]
Confidence do We or, Accurate I'm sorry yeah so i changed This I usually use Confidence so Accuracy try
Again Pull This Up and
Yes so there We [go] so we've got our Predicted values so these are
The Basically The next 30 Days of Unknown values for Us that's like These are Just straight up the stock Prices
Which
Is actually Pretty cool because, we you know like that whole Scaling part Is also Playing A?
Major Role Here it's Still Outputting you know Stock Prices That are of
Decent Value To us anyway [I] think it's cool
So so These are the next
30 Days of Prices so then let's Say you, wanted to graph that so what we're Going to do?
Is we're Going to come Up to the Top and again?
We're Going to just blast Through Wrapping This if you're Confused or whatever I have matt Plot lib
Tutorials so you Can Check Those out if You want to learn more About Graphing but Otherwise
We're Going to Import and in Fact We'll Just Add date Time Here
Date Time
And then, we're Going to Import matt Plot plug
Lib [pie] [Plot] as [P] [lt]. From matt Plot
Lib
Import Style and Then, We're Going to Say Styled I use
Gg Plot so [it's] Just to plot stuff this Is how to Make it Look decent [This] Is how to specify Which
Decent Looking Thing you want so now
What we're Going to Say Is we're Come Down?
[We'll] Just Come Down Here and we're Going to say df
Forecast
Equals nP [and] This Just Specifies That that entire Column is Just
Full of Not a Number Data and you'll see why in a moment but We'll Actually put some Information there Shortly
Now, we need to find out what the last Date was this might not be the bestest way to do something like this but This
Is how we're Going to Actually Plot this on on the the graph so to Say Last Date
Equals df [Kyle] [Oak]
Whoops
Negative 1 so this is the very Last, Date We'll get the name of that and then
We're Going to Say the last unix Value Is equal to last date Time Stamp and
Then One day This Is how Many Seconds are in a day so you can just do the math There if You want but it's
86,400 and then the next unix
Would Be like the next day Right and These are We know These are Daily Prices so we're Just Going to
We're Kind of Hard Coding this part it just so we Can create a graph but Last unix plus one day
So when you do a Prediction the Prediction has no idea like what
Date that Is that's like [Four] all right so remember
When you're doing machine Learning [x] and y Does not Correspond to like
Necessarily the Axes on a graph in This case it doesn't x or the Features
[Y] is the label it Just so happens the label is the Price so [y] it is correct
What is x correct no because the Date Is not a feature so that's that's why?
We're Kind of Having to Work Around here Because?
We actually don't have the date Values I have lost my mouse I have no Idea Where my mouse Is there We go anyway
Next [unix], okay so now we've got the Dates and Now we need to actually Populate the
Data Frame With the the new Dates and
The forecast values so the way, we're going to do that Is we're Going to Say for I in
Forecast Set
next date Equals [date] Time Date Time dot from [Timestamp]
Next
Unix and
then We're Just going to Say next unix, plus Equals That value of one day so one Day and
Then Df Dot Loke
[and] then next date Whoops next Date
Equals and then, we're Going to, do like a one-Liner for loop here so we're Gonna Say [mpn] for something
We don't Care about in Range of?
The Len of df
Columns
Let's See, range Minus 1 and then plus I
So what we're Doing?
Is we're Iterating Through the forecast set Taking each Forecast and day and then setting Those as the values in the Data Frame
Basically Making The Features
[The] Future Feature Is not a number okay [and]
Then The last line Just Takes all of The first Columns Sets Them to
Numbers and Then The Final Column is Whatever I is which is the Forecast in This Case?
so now, we're Going to go ahead and do Is
We're Going to say df
Adj dot Close
Dot Plot and then, we're Going to say df
Forecast
for Cast
Dot Plot and Then
We're Going to do plt legend we'll put that in The Fourth [Location] that's Just like the Bottom right and then
We're Gonna Say [Pl] [Tx] label
And we'll Say that's the date plt Dot Y Label that is your?
Price and Then Finally plt - oh, okay, [so] we Zoom Through that Hopefully that for Loop is going to Work out
[We'll] find out Shortly?
See, i've got a graph Here yes
[ok] so this is our actual Graph of the Data Pull this Up and
As you can See this Is this is the known Data Here and Then
Over [Here] is our Predicted Data so Let me Zoom [Into] [That] spot
Right so this is like the future Prediction here the forecast, [okay]?
Um so it's just like a really quick way to visualize the Data and Really the Complex Part the Reason why
We had All This Nasty to Crap in Here was Just Simply so you Can Have Dates on the Axes?
Because that's How I am I wanted to have the dates There so anyway [but] yeah so that's how you Can Actually forecast out
The Data and [Actually] do a Prediction but the Crux of doing a Prediction With Scikit-Learn Is
Right
Here and
Just Remember you Can Pass a single value or you could Pass an Array [of] values and it will Just
Output in The Same order The Array of values and Then from There
We [just] used Logic to know that each Because each investment Is a day writer each Price Report was it One day?
So then that Just means that each forecast. Was like One Day Later right so we just kind of used our Brains for that One?
so Anyway
and i guess the other Thing to think About DFl Oak Just in Case I'm not Sure We ever Actually covered that in
Pandas But What Happens There is Basically dot [Lok] is going to be Referencing the
Index for the Data Frame so when you do [df] [not] Lok, next date Basically what that's Saying
Is that next date is a date Stamp right and that next day Is um
the
Index of the Data Frame so Maybe it Would Help Just
Let's See print do you have to [ahead] so if You're not if You're not
Confused At This Point Feel free to Care Down to the next Video Where we'll be Talking about Pickling but if you are Confused about
That for Loop I just want to explain that for loop Just so everyone. No, One's like what the hell
So Anyways so yeah so here [write] the date Is the Index so when We Say [DFx] Date?
We're Saying the Index and if that Index doesn't exist it's going to create it and if it did Exist it Would Just Replace it
Okay, then, we're Saying [npm] for underscore in Range lang df Columns Minus, One What the heck Is that?
What that [is] Is Just A list of Values [that] [are] Mp nan so Basically
We're Saying it's Mp nan for a just a high percent Change but all this stuff is Just
Not a number right Because this is Into the future, We don't have Information on that Data okay then?
Coming Back Down Here then, we're Saying plus I
Remember I is the forecast right Right I in forecast set so then
We're Just Saying so basically Is Just this list plus one Value so it's like this Huge List
Well not Huge it's Just These this Many, Columns right, well then
We just Add forecasts at the very end so that's Just our super Hacky way of?
Doing the Following I said to head There but Probably Would've Been More Useful to Say Tail and
so you can see the end of this Data Frame
How yet These are all Those np Nan's and then Finally Just [forecasts] okay so that's all that Is
Sorry if that was a little Confusing Hopefully the Explanation Worked if Not Feel free to ask Question or whatever I'll be happy to Clarify
It now
Then There's Actually One More Thing I want to show you all before
We dive Into Regression and Actually Write a regression Algorithm all on our Own and that's Pickling and the Reason why?
You'd want to Pickle is imagine you have rather than Training a classifier on this you know Relatively Small Data set
We just Had Daily values for the last few Years?
But you Know if you save this to a file you know it's Probably like you know 500 Kilobytes Or something who knows
But let's Say you!
Had Like Intraday Data and You've Got like Two gigabytes Worth of Data that's going to take a while to
Train The Classifier on that Data, so wouldn't it be Nice if Every Time you wanted to Make a prediction so just Consider
Making a Prediction using future Data
Consider Every Time you wanted to Make a Prediction that you Would have to train the Classifier Is that not Just
Crazy Sounding so yes That's Crazy Sounding so in the next tutorial
We're Going to be Talking about Pickling which will let you save your Classifier and then Just Quickly Load it in Without any Training Time
so Definitely very
Useful With Machine Learning
Classifiers so Anyways That's what we'll be Talking About the next Video Questions Comments [leave] them Below Otherwise as always Thanks for Watching Thanks for?
All the support and Subscriptions and until next Time

What is going on everybody and welcome
to the sixth machine learning tutorial.
In this tutorial we're going to be
talking about pickling a little bit
about scaling and then we're going to
move on into diving into the inner
workings of linear regression and of
course the other algorithms. So pickling
really doesn't really have anything to
do with regression just simply is a good
uh good thing to have it at your
disposal so you can save yourself a lot
of time. So first of all what is pickle?
Pickle is just serialization of any
Python object. So this could be a
dictionary or in our case it could be a
classifier or a whole host of other
things. Uh so first of all what we're
going to do is we're going to import not
in caps. We're going to import pickle.
Okay. Also I noticed uh yeah here for
some reason I was like double defining Y
as the label thing. My my mortality is
showing. Anyway um yeah just get rid of
that if you did that. Hopefully
hopefully nobody followed me into that
mistake. But anyway, uh yeah, so there's
that. Now, what we're going to do is the
way the pickle works, this look like a
file, right? You open it, you save it,
right? And then when you want to use it,
you open it and you read it. So, uh
we're going to come down basically, you
know, at what point would you want to
save the classifier, right? So, like
thinking logically, when should we save
the classifier? Well, should we just
should we save it here?
Probably not, right? I mean, you could
you could save that classifier, but
that's a untrained classifier. So, you
probably want to save it here, right?
So, like, what is the purpose of saving
a classifier? It's to avoid doing the
training step
because that's a very tedious step,
right? That that's what's going to take
the most time. In our case, it doesn't
really take that long because we don't
have that much data and we were
threading it. But you can imagine if you
had gigabytes and gigabytes or even
terabytes of data that you were doing
this on every time you wanted to make a
prediction, you would not want to have
to retrain an algorithm. So instead you
can save it. Now of course if you save
it um you know you might want to retrain
it like once a month or something like
this uh but you don't have to retrain it
every time you want to use it. So, uh,
what we're going to say here is we're
going to say with open
and we're going to say, uh, linear
regression.pickle
as WB
um, as F. So, we're going to open this
file with the intention to write and
we're going to just temporary variable
is F. And then we're going to say
pickle.dump.
What are we dumping? We're going to dump
that trained classifier. So CLF where
are we dumping it? F. So that dumps the
classifier. And then to to use the
classifier, all you would actually do is
you would say um like something like
pickle in equals open and then we would
open this file
uh open with RB
and then we would say uh CLF equals
pickle pickle.load.
And we're just going to load pickle in.
So, whoops. Hello.
Uh, what did I do? Here we go. Copy
this. Paste. Okay. So, now let's go
ahead and just run this and see how we
do.
Okay. So, everything works at this
point. And whether or not you recognize
the fact um we have actually renamed
classifier or redefined classifier here.
So, now what would happen if we did
this?
Right now there is no definition of
classifier. We're not saving it as a
pickle. We're simply reading a pickle.
So if I refresh this or reload this,
what we get is
there we go. So you get this information
here. And the pickle is saved in the
directory we're working in. So that
would be if I could find it here. Open
it up. Right, there's your pickle data.
So in our case, the pickle data or the
classifier is actually a really really
small classifier. That's not a big
model. Um, but anyway, we save ourselves
the time of actually training that uh
classifier.
Also, I said it in the introduction
video, but I'll say it again. Um,
remember that we live in a time where
you can spin up a server for a very
short amount of time, and you could do
that. So, if you have like a slower
computer, maybe your only computer is a
relatively slow uh laptop, you've got a
I don't know, one of these little
notebooks or something. Uh if you are
one of those people, you can spin up a
GPU cluster or you can just spin up a
regular server. Um you can spin a very
powerful computer and basically rent it
for a few dollars an hour on Leno,
Digital Ocean, or Amazon Web Services.
And uh if you do that, what you can do
is generally what I do if I'm going to
use a big server. Well, pretty much all
these hosts work the same way. You take
your data, you put it on their server,
and like you'll set everything up. So
you'll you'll transfer all your data
there. You'll set up all the code that
you want to run and all that. And while
you're doing that, you're using like the
smallest version that they have. So
you're paying like a half a penny an
hour to rent that version of a server.
And once you're ready, scale that server
up and then you're paying maybe a few
dollars an hour, maybe even $10 an hour
if you're crazy. Um, scale it up, run
your operation, take your classifier,
save it to a pickle, take your
classifier,
scale back down the server, destroy the
server, whatever, and you're done. So um
just a couple of quick you know pointers
uh because we're not really going to be
talking much about that for scale for a
while but these algorithms actually you
can scale linear regression very well.
So um just keep that in mind. So anyways
um that's really all I have to say about
pickling and scaling and now what we're
going to actually be doing is writing
our own linear regression algorithm um
to learn how that actually works and all
that. So very exciting stuff. If you
have questions, comments, concerns,
whatever, leave them below. Otherwise,
as always, thanks for watching. Thanks
for all the support and subscriptions.

What is going on everybody and welcome to part 7 of our machine learning with [python] tutorial series in this video?
We're going to be beginning to break down
linear Regression and
Begin to build it back up in pure python code from Scratch [Ourselves] before we get started
We have to kind of break down linear regression theoretically before we actually know what to to program by the time
We're [done] here you'll start to at least understand one
How linear regression can be threaded but also most importantly why it works with what's known as?
continuous Data this isn't
just a happenstance is just fundamental to how this linear regression actually works, so let's go ahead and
Cover a couple examples, so for let's say you've got a dataset
expert visualization by centex like this
Okay, so when you look at these data points. Do you see any sort of correlation?
well, probably you know you see a line that goes something like that, okay, and
Let's consider another Data set and this data set will do
Something like this not not the most professional
Dots, but you get the point right?
[so] you can see how you might draw a line through this
Right no problem and in theory this should be a straight line okay, but then what [about] a data set that looked like
Maybe a data set that looks like this
ignoring this ugly plot over here
right
This day set does it have a [best-fit] line?
Yes, does have correlation not
I mean it probably has some sort of correlation if anything that looks looks like it has a slight negative correlation, but
For the most part [I] mean you could draw a best-fit line, but would it be a good fit line?
Right any answer of course is is is no, okay?
so we can see right away that you know is there a relationship between
in our case x and y and
It doesn't look like there is [a] valid
Relationship between them so in the case where you don't have a relationship between x and y?
Doing something [like] linear regression is not going to be very beneficial and also
It's just clearly that like yes x could be in theory kind of continuous and y can be continuous data
But we just see there's no. There's really no [relationship] here okay, so this data just would not work with linear regression
so let's say though you do you've got [a] graph and
Um you've got some data okay, so we've got some data and you decide
Yeah, you sure you sure can do linear regression like like eyeballing it or something. We might say that
Okay, so so we have this line right this pink line. This is our best fit line
Right and it is a we'll assume. It's a straight line
What is the definition like how do you define that line?
well, I will take a journey back to
To middle school where we remember that y equals?
Mx plus
B, right
And obviously [we're] you know you've got your low values next to each other that they're being multiplied
So we know [that] the equation of a line is y equals Mx plus b. So at at any point along x?
right like let's say you've got some x at any point along x
you would just you you just plug x into here and
then you need the values of M and
be and then you will just get the answer for whatever why is
Okay, so with the question of y equals Mx plus
B we know that we'll be able to figure out whatever x is, but we are left trying to figure out
What is m and, what is b? So first let's talk about?
What m is so we know [m] is?
the [slope]
Alright, so [that's] the slope of the line and we know that b is
the
Y-intercePt
Okay, so first let's consider the slope so here
We're going to just address m which is our slope
so the equation for m is
For a best-fit. We're talking about just for a [best-fit] [line] here the way that you figure that out is m equals
[and]
This is going to be the mean of x times the mean of y
So when you have a straight line those are supposed to be straight lines. We have a straight line over the value
that's just that mean so x the mean of all the x's times the mean [of] all the y's
minus
the mean of
all the x's times the y's
[ok] so it's important to understand the difference between those first multiplication. That's [2nd] multiplication then it's all of that over
the mean of
your x's
squared
minus the mean
[of] your x's squared right, so this is the
the mean of all your x's to the power of 2 minus
The mean of x's to the power of 2 right, and that's all of your x's okay now. We're going to be talking about
the [sum]
the Y-intercept or the best-fit
Y-intercept, so [that's] just a
B eeee and
that is your
y-intercept, I'm just going to say why int and
this one is actually a much easier equation, and that is actually just simply [B] equals and
this is going to be the mean [of] the y's
minus M
times the mean of the xs
Right so that m is you know from?
Over there, so that's how you calculate the m and the b. So again the line is simply
Y
equals Mx
plus
B
We have our m here we've got to be here
so now you're ready to go with the the
Calculation of the [best-fit] line given any x's and y's now again. This is simply on you know
[two-dimensional] Data as you as you increase in [your] dimensions in vector space this can get much more complex
[but] yes, whereas this is very simple regression example, so anyways
that's the math that goes behind it it just [basically] boils down to
you know this is the major algorithm that you're using and to find the values you're using this algorithm in this algorithm, and
That can be very simply translated to python code
So that's what we're going to be starting [to] do in the next tutorial is converting these
Actually python code and then applying it to some actual
Some actual data here, so if you have any questions comments concerns
Whatever leave them below otherwise as always thanks for watching thanks [for] all the support and subscriptions and until next time

what is going on everybody and welcome
to part eight of our machine learning
tutorial Series in this part we're going
to start working on creating a simple
linear regression algorithm from scratch
in Python so to start we know that the
definition of a line is yal mx + b and
so we know that X will figure out just
simply because that's on the x- axis but
we know we need to know M and B and M is
going to be our best fit slope and then
B is that Y intercept so first we're
going to calculate for M the slope and
I'll pull up the equation again just as
a reminder so that's just m equals the
mean of the X values times the mean of
the Y values minus the mean of the X's
times the Y's all of that is divided
over the mean of the X
to the^ of two minus the mean of all of
the X's to the^ of two
okay easy enough so now we're going to
be Translating that into python code so
the first thing that we're going to do
is from statistics we're going to
import uh the mean or mean and then
we're going to import numpy as NP so um
you should be able to guess why we're
bringing in mean uh there was there's
quite a few uses of mean there also uh
just for the record the regression line
like a regression line is just a a
straight line so you know for example uh
an example might be I'll just pull up an
image here right like this is some data
points and then you've got this straight
red line that's your regression line
that's also your best fit line and you
might even hear people call it the Y hat
line if you're talking to St
statistician anyway now we're going to
Defining values
Define some simple values uh you you can
get to the point where you're using real
data but I think the easiest thing to do
is to just Define some simple some
simple data so we're just going to say
X's 1 2 3 4 5 and six yeah and then some
y's we'll say are uh five 4 6 5 6 and
7even uh you don't have to do this part
but we're going to visualize this data
real quick so import matplot li. pyplot
as
PLT and I'm just going to we're not
going to make it pretty or anything I'm
just going to say PLT do plot X's y's
PLT doow just so we can see the data
we're working with here okay so this is
the data of course we just made it a
line so let's make it a scatter plot
okay so that's the data that we're
working with it's just a simple scatter
plot but you can probably see already um
this is positive L correlated data and
you could probably think of a line might
be something like this you know drawing
up anyway um so that's our data and I'm
Changing data type
going to move this over okay now I'm
going to get rid of showing the graph
now we we know that what we kind of need
to do is if you recall in the um
previous examples our data was not
actually a python list it wasn't a
python array because it doesn't exist
instead it was a numpy array so we're
going to change this to numpy do array
and um you just can put that around in
like
um parentheses like that so that's just
like basically converting this to our
numpy array and then we're going to also
change the data type so we're going to
say dtype actually we're not changing it
this will be the default but mp.
float64 and we're mainly doing this
because we're probably going to be
revisiting linear regression uh and
it'll be in a time where the data type
actually matters for now you can or you
don't have to put the data type there um
we're just being very explicit there
with the with the data type so um so now
Getting the best fit slope
we want to get the best fit slope so
let's say we're going to define a
function that generated the best fit
slope okay so best fit slope and we know
we' pass the x's and y's through and
then eventually we want to get to the
point where we return M and then we
would just be like M whoops m equals
best best fit slope of the x's and y's
right and we're
done right but anyway that's a that's a
nice uh skeleton function there so uh
the first order of business is we do the
mean of the X's times the mean of the
Y's right so mean x times the mean of
the
Y's so how do we calculate that well we
can start off by saying m equals now
this is not complete of course but we're
going to say m equals and at first it's
the mean of the
X's multiplied by the mean of the
Y's okay so so far so good what was that
next step mean of the X's times the mean
of the Y's and then it's minus the mean
of the X's times the
Y's so now what we need to do is uh add
that so the mean of the X's times the
mean of the Y so that's one variation or
like one of the I hate to say variables
uh one of the parts so then what we're
going to do is we're going to put more
parentheses space you don't have to add
the space there uh that's definitely not
pep eight just making it easier to read
Because this is kind of going to be a
long one anyway minus and that was the
mean of the X's times the Y's
right okay so now going back to our um
function here uh it is we have done the
entire top of uh
this fraction basically so now we need
to do the next layer so the next thing
that we're going to do is coming back to
the code we're going to add a third
parentheses here so I'm going to add
another parenthesis add a space you've
got this space or these parenthesis
parentheses I'm going to add a space a
slash so this is our division sign and
then I'm going to hit enter
and the reason why I'm able to hit enter
is because of this parentheses here okay
so anyways um that's why we're encasing
all of this in a
parenthesis just for the record so now
going back to the bottom we've got we
need to do the mean of the X's to the
power of
two okay so how might we do that well uh
the first of all let's consider what um
the power of two actually is is the
power of two is basically
the um like let's say it's mean the X's
to the power of two that's the mean of
the X's times the mean of the X's okay
um so in Python there's a few different
things that we can do you can do
something like um let's do this and you
could say a lot of times you can do mean
of the X's to the power of two like that
but let's run that that really quick and
we'll see that um we get this
unsupported operand for the data type
we're using okay another option can be
times
times and it looks like that one is
acceptable another option is mean of the
X's literally times the mean of the
X's okay both of those will give you um
what you're looking
for now finally
it was
um the mean of the x is squar minus the
X's squar or the mean of the X's
squared so for us to do that and that
was minus right so this is all one so at
this point we're going to go minus mean
of the and this is the mean of the A's
squ so this could be um you could a lot
of times you could get away with this
but I don't think uh because of our data
type we'll do that yeah so or
actually two typo go to
amateur anyway um all right so that's
not going to work out for us um so
another option would be uh like that
like times times two okay that's
acceptable um and then there's of course
X's like this okay so you can do
whichever one you makes you feel better
and sleep better at night regardless
there are is our M and then we can even
go and print out
M okay so M minus
15.26% with that let's
see that does close all that off SL
so I'm getting myself confused now so
let's see let me make sure we close this
off right cuz I don't think that should
be what we were getting
there um that's about right and then we
wanted
this mean
of because this whole thing needs to be
divided by this whole thing
so the mean of the x is like
this let's run that one more time that
looks to be more along the lines of what
I'm looking for okay so so welcome to
the world of
pemos right this is the order of
operations right parentheses exponents
multiplication division addition
subtraction so if you want to get around
the order of operations you need to use
parentheses these correctly I was my
issue was that we were
dividing um we were trying to what we
needed to do was divide by this minus
this like both those things together but
instead division was occurring before
subtraction so we were actually dividing
doing this divided by this and then
subtracting this from the final answer
which was why we were getting such a
large negative number there okay so
again this is just this is the slope of
a line so A5 slope is is first of all -5
is kind of weird um oh I'm printing out
pimes um it's weird to have a negative
slope to the line uh where you have
clearly a positively correlated data but
anyways um so we have our uh our M and
now we need just one more thing and that
is our B and so that's what we're going
to be working on in the next tutorial is
calculating B and then once we have that
we do linear regression so anyways uh
stay tuned to the next video if you got
questions comments concerns whatever up
to this point please feel free to leave
them below otherwise as always thanks
for watching thanks for all the support
subscriptions and until next time

what is going on everybody Welcome to
part nine of our machine learning
tutorial Series in this tutorial we are
going to be continuing working on linear
regression here and what we're going to
be doing is we've got the slope now we
need to calculate the Y intercept and
just as a reminder the reason why we're
doing this is this is the calculation
for the slope of the best fit line and
now we need to do the calculation for
the Y intercept of the best fit line
line and as a reminder the calculation
of the Y intercept for the best fit line
is B which is the Y intercept equals the
mean of the Y's minus M * the mean of
the X so actually this equation is
probably is in theory the most complex
equation because it includes the
calculation of M but once you have M
this one's actually pretty darn easy so
this will be pretty quick so um so the
first thing that we're going to go ahead
and do is no longer is this function
only best fits slope it's best fit
slope and
intercept great so m equals the
following and then we need to also
return B so then
m b and then
m b great okay now we actually need to
have B somewhere in this function well
that's pretty simple because it's just b
equals the mean of the Y's right so
let's go back to the function mean of
the Y's minus M * the mean of the X's so
mean of the Y's minus
M and times the mean of the
X's so um so that's our B and now we can
return m and b so we can go ahead and
print
that we didn't change the name of the
function what a
noob okay so uh there we go we've got uh
our best fit slope and the best fit Y
intercept so now what if we wanted to
actually create a line that fits the
data um that we've got here well it's
really simple because we have um the
calculation right we've got m and b so
now we just need to make like a list of
y's so for example we could say
regression uncore line
equals and in this case it would be
remember y = mx + b so this would be we
could make a oneline for Loop pretty
much here so we could do M *
x what a mess up okay M * x + B so
that's MX plus b
for um X in
X's okay so we would just use the same
X's here 1 2 3 four 5 six and basically
we're just saying MX plus b for each x
in x so this is just a oneline for Loop
that will create this regression line
for us um this is exactly identical as
doing like 4X in X's
regression line.
append um
this okay just for the
anyway that's our regression line Okay
so we've already got map plot li. plot
let's go ahead and from map plot lib
import style because now that we've made
something cool we want to use
style
um
538 okay we've got a regression line now
we're going to do PLT do scatter X's y's
and then pt. plot X's regression line
and then finally we're going to do PLT
show boom regression line okay and that
looks pretty good to me it probably
hopefully looks pretty good to you um so
I'll close
that and um what if what if so we've got
this data here let me pull it back up
actually we've got our data and what if
now remember you're like you might be
thinking well great you've created
regression line what does that mean to
me but the the whole point is that you
can now at this point you first of all
you've created a model for the for the
data right yal MX plus b where m is
equal to um 042 and B is 4 uh that is
the model of our data and so using that
model we can find out other information
we could make a prediction if we wanted
so for example we could say
um let's say predict underscore x = 8 so
we want to predict Y where x equals 8
well that's pretty easy predict y
equals um it would just be M
times uh predict X so
MX plus
b right simple enough and then we could
even um
I'm trying to think if I want to scatter
it I guess yeah I mean because that's a
prediction so PLC has scatter um and
then we'll just I'm just going to copy
this copy and paste and change that and
then now if we were to um bring this up
this is our prediction and in fact we
could uh scatter and then we're going to
make we'll do uh color
equals g for green okay so that's where
our prediction is and you can see like
yeah it would go all the way to that
little little spot there okay okay so um
so now we're at the point where we were
able to we had some data we fit a model
to that data and we even learned how to
make a prediction based on that data are
we done well
um we've got what we need to make
predictions but there's another integral
part of all of this and that is remember
before um where we said okay we don't
want just a good line we want the best
line by the same token not only do we
want want the best fit line we want that
best fit line to be a good fit line
right you want it to be a good fit um in
this case it's a good fit but we can
find the best fit line to a very poor
fit of data and the question is how good
is this best fit line and maybe more
more uh accurately put how accurate is
the best fit line um so we can actually
calculate how good of a fit this best
fit line is and when you do that you've
got a model and the model might have a a
prediction right and the prediction
might have a certain accuracy to it but
it also might have a certain confidence
to it as well and linear regression
accuracy and confidence are very similar
until you start getting into many many
many dimensions um but then when we get
into something like K near neighbors you
can definitely have a very big
difference between accuracy and
confidence but anyways uh The Next Step
that we need to do is figure out how
good of a fit is the best fit line and
that's what we're going to be talking
about in the next two tutorial if you
have any questions or comments leave
them below otherwise till next time

hello everybody and welcome to Part 10
of our machine learning tutorial Series
in this part what we're going to be
talking about is we've been talking
about linear regression and we've got to
the point where we could calculate the
best fit line in our python code but now
the question is how good of a fit is our
best fit line how do we determine the
accuracy right so the way that we
determine accuracy is through r s or the
coefficient of determination
and the coefficient of determination is
calculated using what's known as squared
error so first we need to figure out
what the heck squared error is and then
we can calculate r squ or the
coefficient of determination so uh to
exemplify this consider you know you've
got uh two
graphs and then you've got some plots on
those graphs and then what you want to
do is uh draw the best fit line okay so
something like uh like this and then I
have no idea something like this right
and if I asked you which one is a better
fit uh you would say the the one on the
right uh and then if I asked why is that
the best fit you might think for a
moment but you would probably come up
with well the the dots are closer to the
line on the one on the right as they are
closer than they are the one on the left
anyways now of course we we don't have
any ticks on our axes here and so I
might say that uh the one on the left
were actually zoomed in really far uh
and uh they're actually much closer so
you don't really know but but really
it's it's how good of the fit is it how
good of the fit is the best fit line how
good of your fit is your model to your
data set so it's very relative to your
data set and you'll see more why in just
a moment so we know it's the distance so
so so what how do we actually calculate
this well we use squared error so we've
got a graph here and then we got some
data points some beautiful data points
and we have our best fit line and the
way that we calculate squared error is
we say the error is the distance between
the point and the line in the best fit
line and then what we say is it's not
just error we want to square that value
so we want to do squared error is you
know e squar okay so you might ask why
are we squaring it right well in this
case the distance right in one case the
distance might be positive in another
case the distance might be negative so
one reason why we Square it is so that
we're only dealing with positive values
you might then ask why is it e^ s and
not like absolute value of e well we
want to square it because what if you
had a point that was like way out here
that would be an outlier and your linear
data set should not have an outlier uh
because we only want to do linear
regression on linear data right that
that only makes sense so we Square the
error because we want to
um we want to penalize for outliers so
then you might ask well why not um using
to the power of four or six or 18 for
that matter you could use these other
ones if you want to penalize for uh
outliers you can use a bigger d uh a
bigger value there if you want to
penalize even heavier um for outliers
it's just so happens that the standard
is going to be squared error and if
you're not using squared error uh and
maybe you're you're publishing something
publicly either in a paper or maybe
you've got um some data uh some sort of
module in python or something you would
want to alert people to the fact that
you are not doing it the way that most
people do it okay so that is squared
error now how do we calculate the
coefficient of determination or R squ so
r R squ is calculating the following so
R 2qu
equals and it is
one
minus and it's one minus the squared
error and generally you're going to see
squared error denoted as s
e so it's the squared error of the Y hat
line what the heck is the Y hat line
remember y hat best fit regression line
all the same thing divide
by the squared
error of the mean of the yse and that's
the mean of the Y's of your data set so
so what might that actually look like
the mean of your y's might be
that so it's just a a simple straight
line and what we're trying to do is
compare the accuracy of that line to the
accuracy of like the best fit line and
obviously the best fit line is almost
certainly going to be better than the
mean of the Y's but we want it to be
like way better okay so looking at R
squar and the calculation of R
squ what what's like a what's a good
value right like what do we think might
be a good value versus what do we think
might be a bad value so let's consider a
value like let's say R2
equals
um
0.8 how would we arrive at 0.8 well we
would know that in order for R 2 to be
0.8 it would have to be um the squared
error of the Y hat line divided by the
squared error of the mean of the Y's
would have to be like this equation here
would have to be equal to 0
.2 right that's that's the only way we
could get to to one minus what is
0.8 so how what would be an example of
this this equation here being 0.2 well
we would find that we would need the
squared error let's say of Y um maybe
maybe the squared error of the Y hat
line is two and the squared error of the
mean of the Y's is 10 okay
equals so if that was the case we would
we were saying you know the squared
error of the Y hat line is actually
significantly lower than the squared
error of the mean of the Y's is that a
good thing or a bad thing well that's
that's a pretty good thing we we would
prefer it to be even lower than that but
we you know that's pretty good so that
means this data is probably pretty
linear right so it's it's so an R squar
of 08 is is pretty good what if your R 2
was like. 3 for example so if r s for
example was uh
03 how would we arrive maybe at that
equation well we would need the uh
squared error divided by or the square
eror of the Y hat divided by the square
Ro of the mean of the Y's we would need
that to be
0.7
right and we could get that by you know
7/ 10 and now the square error of the Y
hat is a lot closer to the square error
of the mean of the Y's so obviously this
is this is more negative so we want the
r s value to be High um how high is kind
of determined by you uh but the accuracy
in this case of our model is let's say
we we're going to call it 0.8 that is
the r squ value so it's not percent
accuracy it is it is the r squ it's the
coefficient of determination that is the
value so now that we know what the
calculation for r s is and we know what
squared error is and we know how to
calculate the Y hat line we've already
done that we know how to calculate the
mean of the Y's we haven't done that
necessarily um actually we have done
that because that was part of our um our
best fit line calculation so we've done
that we know how to do everything here
so we can definitely calculate this in
Python so that is what we are going to
be doing in the next video if you have
questions comments concerns up to this
point point please feel free to leave
them below otherwise as always thanks
for watching thanks for all the support
and subscriptions and until next time

hello everybody and welcome to part 11
of our machine learning tutorial Series
in this video we're going to be building
on the last one which is where we
learned how to calculate the R squar
value or the coefficient of
determination value and this value is
the it's the value of how good of a fit
Squared Error
is our best fit
line okay so that is the equation now
how do we actually go about calculating
it so a big part of this equation is
actually squared error so we're going to
create a new function that calculates
squared error so we're just going to
I'll just add it down here and so this
will be Define
squared
error and the squared error is uh the
difference between the
Y's original or a ridge we'll say and
the Y's line so recall that square error
is the distance between whatever line is
in question and the points it's the the
amount of Y distance um that's the error
and then we square that error so um so
we need the the actual points and the
actual spot on the Y
Line so that is that so then what we're
going to say is the
um let's actually here what we need to
do is return the
sum of
the let's see sum of the Y's line minus
the Y's original rid
okay
squared so that that would be your
squared error for the entire uh the
entire line and and you know this this
equation is relatively um
simple but I want to give it a function
of squared error just so it's I think
it's a little easier to call upon but um
feel free to to do what you want but of
course you can get the original data
points by just y's original and then you
can get the line because we know what MX
and b or I mean well we know what MX and
B are but we got m and b already here so
we would just plug in um MX and B to get
the Y Line of any y original point so
anyway um in our case that's all we are
plotting since we created our regression
line only using the X's for X in X's
anyways uh so that's our squared error
now we need to calculate coefficient of
determination which again is just one
Coefficient of Determination
minus the square error of the Y hat line
divided by the square error of the uh
mean of the Y's so we can calculate that
Define
coefficient of
determination that's y's Ridge and then
y's line that should be a
comma we calculate that by saying the y
mean line
equals the mean of actually what we need
to do is
brackets um this is mean
y's or Ridge
for y in
y's or Ridge so that'll make our y mean
line that's just it's just it will make
a a single value and each value is just
the mean of Y for every y that we have
in the original line so that's our y
mean line squared error of the
regression line is equal to um I'm just
going to copy and paste rather than
typing this out so copy that paste and
then we're going to say the squared
error y mean equals squared error Y is
original and then instead of uh y's line
it's the y mean line and then finally we
just return one
minus uh and then that would be one
minus the squared error of the
regression line divided by the squared
error of the mean line right 1 minus
R Squared
square error of regression divided by
the squared error of the mean
line great so there's our coefficient of
determination so now all we would have
to do is we might say something like um
we might come down I don't know here we
could say r s or you could call it
coefficient of determination equals
coefficient of
determination and then you might have
something like this Y is regression line
so that's the Y's original that's the
line we're curious about and we want to
know the R 2 value of that regression
line so we could print r
squared save and run
it and the value we get here is
0.58 so uh just as a note if the
regression line was if the let's say the
regression line is as good as the y mean
then our value here would be zero right
it' be one minus basically a whole
number one right um so you know anything
you know like you can't just say
anything above 50% is more accurate
anything above zero means the regression
line was more accurate Now you kind of
have to make your own determination of
what kind of coefficient of
determination line you're looking for in
this case um we get 0 58 which is
obviously it's significantly more
accurate because you know to get 058 the
equ equation would have to be 4 2 so to
be0 42 that would be uh basically like
42 out of 100 so the squared error is
much less right so anyways squared error
and coefficient of determination is not
the only calculation of how accurate a
best fit line is but it is a calculation
of um how good of a fit the best fit
line
is so in the next tutorial what we're
going to do is build some sample data or
and test our everything we've got so far
all our algorithm and all that cuz
there's a lot of math that's involved
here it's basic math but it's a lot of
math involved and we need to have some
sort of way to figure out if everything
is right like 0 58 something could be
totally wrong here we wouldn't really
have any way to figure out how it's
wrong other than maybe doing it by hand
or something like that so in the next
tutorial we're going to be talking about
testing all of our assumptions and
Sample data and stuff like that if you
have questions comments leave them below
otherwise till next time

what is going on subscribers and others
welcome to Part 12 of our machine
learning tutorial Series in this
tutorial what we're going to be talking
about is testing our assumptions so up
until this point it's been I would say
rather handwavy uh in the sense that I
have just said hey these are the
algorithms and whatever they output
these are the answers to those
algorithms and uh we have done linear
regression R squ and all this and so uh
the question is we need to actually kind
of test all of these assumptions so
we've got actually um two major
algorithms one is the equation for the
best fit line and the other one is the r
squ or coefficient of determination so
we've got these two major algorithms
that are also comprised of many other
algorithms and as we even saw uh just a
few videos ago the misplacement of a
single parentheses um changes everything
and and completely ruins the entire
thing so so we need to be able to test
to make sure things are working as
intended so in the world of programming
this is there's a similar kind of field
and structure called unit testing where
we you know test each little
small unit basically that we can in a
program and this kind of helps us from
getting into trouble now this is not
going to be unit testing but the idea is
fairly similar we've got a lot of ideas
we've got a lot of inner working parts
and we want to at least test them to
make sure the easiest way we can do that
is by working with sample data and by S
and Sample data that we uh have the
power to change so that we can create a
data set that is a more linear data set
and uh or at least the relationship is
more linear uh and then we can test to
make sure is r squared uh better higher
right um and and then also just test our
best fit line but for the most part
we're actually going to be testing uh R
squ and uh if uh if if the data is not
more linear we can make it more uh
spread apart r squ should be lower and
so on so anyways uh let's go ahead and
do that and we can also confirm visually
that the best fit line is is indeed
working just by looking at it and and
seeing whether or not it is indeed a
best fit line or what looks to be a best
fit line so um first what we're going to
go ahead and do is um we're going to
import random because we're going to be
using
random um numbers everybody the
obligatory uh pseudo random if you don't
say it's pseudo random someone
absolutely feels the desire and urge to
comment and say but it is not real
random so anyways pseudo random there
you go you uh nitpickers okay so um what
we're going to do is uh just right under
here let's uh we're going to say Define
create uncore data set and then here
we're going to have um we're just going
to pass some some parameters first is
how much like how many data points do we
actually want to create here and then
we're going to say
um we'll pass variance and this will be
you how variable do we want this data
set to
be then we're going to pass um step and
step will just be how far on average to
step up the Y value per point and we'll
assign a default value there and then
finally we're going to do uh correlation
and this is where we can just pass a
value and say we want correlation to be
positive
negative or none um and uh what we're
going to do here is correlation or hold
on so correlation will either be true or
false and then if it is true to get it
to go to be a positive correlation step
will just be some positive number right
because that's changing Y into to be a
negative correlation you would just
change this to a negative number right
so
um and in fact another way we could do
it is we could actually say correlation
is positive or negative and if it's
negative you do a multiplication of the
step and that's actually probably a
better way to do it either way would
work but we'll do it that way actually
so the first thing that we're going to
do is um well we would want to be able
to at the end of this I always like to
build a skeleton function first so at
the end of it what is the objective and
that would be to return the numpy array
of the x's and for now again we will
specify the data type so we don't forget
this later on cuz it's it's probably
going to be useful later on uh so we'll
say float
64 so that Returns the x's and then we
also need to
return um y values so y's and then dtype
equals NP float 64 okay so that's the
objective that we want to do and then
now what we want to do is uh create some
start creating at least some random
values so the first thing we're going to
say we're going to start with Val equals
1 so that's just going to be the first
value for y basically and then we're
just going to say Y is an empty list and
then we're going to we could say
something like uh 4 I in range of and
how many how what should this range be
well it should be hm for how many right
so for range in hm what are we going to
do well we're going to say y equals the
Val plus random. Rand
range and um it should be random Rand
range from the negative variance to the
positive variance so some range in there
is what we want to do first and then
we're going to say uh y's do
append that y so here we would just be
in iterating through the range uh using
that how much variable and then we're
just depending that current value plus a
random one um so this would give us data
but really no correlation if we actually
wanted um that data so then what we
would ask is so keep in mind that um Y
is literally the V so it's just that
starting value and then a variance from
that starting value so this would be
pretty worthless at the moment um it
would just be somewhat varied but not by
much well it depends on what you said
the variance was anyway um so then what
you could say now is if correlation and
correlation
equals um positive what we could do is
Val plus equals
step um which would in this case default
to two and then L if correlation and
correlation
equals negative what do we want to do
well Val minus equals
step finally at the end of the day what
all we're going to do is now we've got
the Y's so we just need some x's so we
could say something like X's equals and
we'll just do a on line for loop I for I
in range of what uh the L of y's that's
good enough or you could do uh how much
for that matter anyway um so now we've
got what we need and we're returning
some x's and y's so to create a sample
data set we could do something um like
and for example let's we could could
leave this here for now but we I'm going
to comment it out just so we know that
we're working with our new data instead
so underneath this um you could create a
new data set but I guess we'll create it
um we'll create it down here underneath
all these other
functions so you could say something
like X's y's equals create data set and
then let's say we did a um recall that
it's how much variance the step and the
correlation so let's say we said we want
40 data points
uh with a variance of 40 the step will
be two and uh
correlation will make it that
positive so now we have X's y's uh we
can print r squared and all that fun
stuff and um let's go ahead and run that
real quick and in fact are we still yeah
we're still graphing that prediction so
let's we'll get rid of the prediction we
could actually leave the prediction
there that might be kind of interesting
um for now that we might run into
trouble I'm not really sure if we're
going to get in trouble for that or not
but we'll just do that
and let's run it and see we might have
to change something else but I think
that would be everything we would change
awesome so here's our data set and sure
enough there's a nice best fit line for
us and uh we see that um we we would
kind of agree with that visually let's
go and graph that other plot though that
one and this will be a g
prediction I don't even see it it was
for xal 8 I guess it would be right on
the line and then we're plotting the
regression line so I'm guessing the line
is just going right over it probably
it's just being drawn over it um still
not seeing it however it was x equals 8
right so it should be that it's probably
this little plot right here I'll zoom
in it's there I don't know if you'll be
able to see that on the on the video but
it is there is indeed a plot there and
in fact we could do something like I
think with scatter it'll be S equals and
then let's try 100 so this is like for
the
size and indeed there is a huge uh green
there so okay um anyway so there's our
prediction as you should expect it's
perfectly on the line so we're going to
close this out and um so now how would
we uh test our assumption well recall
that we've got how much and then
variance so if I said if I took variance
which is currently 40 and we saw that it
was like 0.5 I think for R squ let's
look at it again well since it's random
data this time it was 6 okay so in
theory if we if we decrease the variance
what should happen well what should
happen is that number should go down
pretty significantly so long as we
decrease variance significantly so let's
do it let's do 10 we can save and run
that and as you can see it's much
tighter everything's there and sure
enough the coefficient of determination
is very very strong it's 092 much better
um than before and what if we changed
this to an 80 now it should be less than
6 and sure enough it is less than 0 6
and so what you can begin to do is
automatically write a program that just
simply calculates the coefficient of
determination for um for just a sample
data set and you would just make sure
for example that you'd start with 40
save that number and then you would
change that to 10 and hopefully the
coefficient of determination was less
than this initial number and then if you
went greater it should be greater and so
on that would be a way to test just that
um we'll call it a unit in theory you
could build a unit test out of this but
this isn't quite yet a unit test but
anyway um so you can test that and then
sure enough the other thing you could do
is while initially we had a positive
correlation if we change this to false
we should get quite an ugly um data set
sure enough we do and the coefficient of
determination is almost zero which is
absolutely not surprising because that
almost looks like a completely flat um
completely flat line and sure enough
this data is completely nonlinear so if
you did have a data set and you were
trying to run linear regression on this
data set and um you came back with an r
squar that was this number that's like
0.007 you would probably be smart enough
to decide hey my data is actually not
linear we can't quite do linear
regression with this data that said you
can do other forms of classification
with the data um or not just
classification but you can do other
forms of machine learning I'm thinking
classification um with your data it
doesn't necessarily have to be linear
and in fact Class A lot of
classification is um should be linear in
some way but we'll get there anyway um
that's enough for now I think but uh
just kind of keep in mind that when you
create big big scripts like we have here
in big programs that are kind of based
on a lot of things uh you want to make
sure that it's about right we could
check the best fit line ourselves kind
of visually but r squared we could not
really totally test that but you could
definitely program something uh that
would go through and like I was saying
check to make sure R squ was acting
according to our assumption and our
knowledge of how it ought to act so
we're basically done with regression but
I want to make a quick edit to this
video to cover two pretty important
things one
is a fundamental aspect to machine
learning that might be getting
overlooked using the really simple
example that we that we've used here and
then two I made an error that I think is
bad enough that we we want to cover it
plus I think you can learn a little bit
from from the mistake that I made so
let's let's pop over to the code and
address these two things hopefully
pretty quickly so first of all looking
at the data I'm going to change this to
from 1% basically to to 10% now we're
going to run that and we're going to see
that it's basically an exact copy of
like the the data leading up just
shifted in price a bit right so coming
over
here it's basically the same this
version is squished up a little bit and
that's just because the blue line is the
prediction line that plots even on the
weekends and holidays whereas over here
the stock price only occurs during
Monday to Friday and not on holidays as
well so anyways basically an exact match
just higher in price and the reason is
is kind of twofold one we've created a
linear model that is going to attempt to
do this but then also um we've made a
mistake so we'll address kind of both
but anyway uh the first thing is and the
biggest mistake actually there was two
mistakes one I noticed in the video just
going back over it I'm pretty sure it
was here um there was also a a colon at
the end of the
X I don't I'm not sure why that was
there no one actually brought out that
one I just happened to see it right
before filming this one anyway that
basically is equals x right all that
says is X up to forecast out and then
finish the whole thing so that doesn't
do anything so that was just a typo but
then you get to this point and we're
still kind of in a world of hurt because
x what we were intending to do is say
Okay X is the first let's say in this
case it's 10% uh yeah so the first we're
saying X is the first 90% of data this
is the stuff we're going to train
against and then we're saying X lately
and our objective here was to say x
lately is the last 10% but but instead
what we've done is we've sliced X and
redefined X here and then sliced X after
it's already been redefined so this is
actually minus forecast out of the 90%
so obviously simplifying things a little
bit uh this is the basically up to 90%
And this is the last 10% of that 90%
it's a little B more but anyway uh so
that was just that's a failure in in
logic okay so really to fix that you
just cut that paste it there and there
you have it now this is still going to
create a model that's
relatively Akin and very similar to what
we've already seen and again this is
because we we we're using linear
regression it's going to create a linear
model that resembles what we've already
seen so again you've got some Jagged
then you got to jump up and then price
it's a little different but it's very
very similar okay so anyway that's
that's just given what we've done and
how we've trained it that's going to
happen so now let's talk about the last
thing which is the fundamentals of you
know what kind of features should you
train against so what was the objective
here first of all let me just say the
reason why why we did it this way is
just for Simplicity sake we're just
trying to do a really simple regression
example but let's say you know
regardless of whether or not you're
interested in Stock Investing this
problem is every machine learning
problem is going to likely be a somewhat
complex problem so you have to think
pretty logically about the features that
you choose to use so looking at this
which of these things hinges directly on
on price or will directly impact price
right well obviously adjusted close will
what about high minus low percent does
it matter what the price is no it's a
percent right it's a normalized value so
that doesn't have anything to do with
price how about percent change no right
these maybe volatility right maybe
magnitude same thing with high minus low
percent volatility and like Direction
maybe but not price what about volume no
not price right this is just magnitude
kind of fluctuation maybe stuff like
that vola utility so the only thing that
really hinges on Price is adjusted close
to illustrate that despite training on a
future value that is indeed price what
we can do is we can actually drop
adjusted close from uh the features and
what do you think when we drop this what
do you think's going to happen before we
graph it is that going to create a
similar line that follows price is it
going to be a falling price upward price
Flatline what's it going to create for
the prediction so I think about that we
run it really quick and we'll get our
answer and the answer is not going to be
probably what we were hoping for right
it's just more of a flat line and why do
we get this right well the high minus
low percent you probably had very
similar High minus low percents back
when pric was $400 $600 $800 right not
big differences the only thing that
might be sort of impactful is the
adjusted volume since probably less
people are quickly flipping a $800 stock
as opposed to to a $50 stock or
something like that but regardless these
just aren't the greatest features so
thinking about your problem in this case
it was Stock Investing what what is a
what is a stock price indicative of it's
indicative of the the entire company's
value let's think of Google for example
like $500 billion I
think why is Google worth $500 billion
is it because of the adjusted close High
minus low percent percent change in
adjusted volume I mean no you come on be
logical about it you know that's not the
case there are people who believe in
pattern recognition and stuff like this
but um or at least you know chart
patterns in in stocks and sorry but it's
been tested it's been there's plenty of
research done that doesn't work but
anyway some people still believe it but
but fundamentally why is Google worth
$500 billion it's not because of this
stuff fun fundamentally Google's worth
$500 billion dollar because of things
like its quarterly earnings it's price
to earnings it's price to earnings to
growth it's Book value and so on these
are the things that value the company so
if you wanted to predict stock price you
would use features that attempt to
predict the company's overall value and
then from there you can divide that by
outstanding shares and get a specific
share price for the company but anyway
this was just meant to be a very simple
example if you want to see a more
complex example of doing investing with
features and fundamental features of
companies I do have a tutorial series
out for that it's like 30 something
videos If I recall or maybe 20 or
something but but it's kind of tedious
because you got quarterly earnings which
is every quarter and then you've got
things like price to earnings to growth
which you could measure all the time
Book value price to book you can measure
all the time and so on so a lot of these
things and also just the the entire
company's value is a you know changes as
the day throughout the day so anyway
it's it can get really complex really
quick so we just wanted to use a really
simple example but if you if you are
looking for a more complex version I I
do have one but anyways uh that's it
with progression hopefully you can learn
from my mistakes down here you'll I'll
probably continue making mistakes and
you'll probably make mistakes too and
that's just that's just like part part
of it honestly so luckily we could
visualize this and we could catch it but
a lot of times you're not going to be
able to visually catch it so you want to
like read and reread and all that your
code but still you're going to make
mistakes so uh unless you're a robot or
something so anyways hopefully you can
learn from my mistakes otherwise we're
going to be leaving regression behind
now and traversing into classification
so stay tuned for that as always thanks
for watching

what is going on everybody Welcome to a
new section on the machine learning with
Python tutorial Series this section
we're going to be talking about
classification and a handful of methods
for
classification so uh as we dive in the
first uh classification algorithm that
we're going to be covering is K nearest
neighbors and but really all
classification algorithms boil down to
the same thing so if you recall with
linear regression question the objective
was to create a model that best fits our
data and with classification the general
purpose is to create a model that best
divides or separates our data so uh
let's go ahead and show a quick example
so let's say you've got a
graph and then on that graph you've got
some data points like
these and the objective is to figure out
how to separate these into obvious
groups uh and even just looking at this
intuitively you could see that there are
two groups here one group is this group
and one group is this group right you
just know that's the case so what we
just did just now is actually uh
clustering right like with our mind
there when we were just looking at this
and we decided that these were two
groups we actually did clustering
classification is actually even more
simple than what we just did here so
what what classification is going to do
is the following so with classification
you're going to have a data set that
looks um more like this where you've got
a group that you know are pluses and a
group that you know are minuses and the
objective is uh to create some sort of
model that fits both of these groups
right that that properly divides them so
almost like some sort of model that
defines the pluses and some sort of
model that defines the minuses so what
if you had an
unknown uh dot somewhere right like what
if you have a data point that's like
here looking at that just visually which
group would you assign that to would you
put it with the minus the blue minuses
or the green uh
pluses most likely you would put it with
the green green pluses and then I ask
you why why would you have done that
right like what what made you think that
that was the case so think about that
and then what if we had um a point over
here where would you assign that point
well in this case most likely the blue
minuses um and again think about why
might you choose that and then finally
what if we had a point
maybe right here in the middle
almost now how would you classify that
and it turns out the way that you would
class classify that might actually vary
depending on the algorithm that you're
using but in most cases I think that if
you have a DOT like um like this one
you're going to classify that based on
proximity to the other points I think
most people uh when looking at a graph
like this would would go based on
proximity than anything else so you're
you're thinking to yourself well this
this point is closest to this point for
sure this point and this point and and
what you're doing when you think of that
because those three points are much
closer than the closest blue minus which
is all the way here right that's pretty
far so what are you doing when you do
that well it turns out what you've just
done is nearest
neighbors so uh with nearest
neighbors you are uh just checking to
see basically who are the closest points
to this new new new point on the data in
this case we've got two dimensional data
but you can have threedimensional 10
dimensional and so on so obviously
visually for you looking at this is
super simple but what if you had yeah
like 10 Dimensions or a thousand
Dimensions um suddenly you can't do this
by ey anymore and that's where the
machine begins to shine so that's
nearest neighbors but this is actually
um most people use K nearest neighbors
so what the heck is K nearest neighbors
well it turns out that if you just try
to start thinking about okay how does
this process actually going to work um
do you actually need to compare it to
every single point in a data set to get
your answer and most likely you don't
need to do that but so with K nearest
neighbors we'll just add a k I suppose
here but that's all together right K
nearest neighbors um you decide what the
number of K is going to be so let's say
uh K was equal to two what you would do
is you would find the two closest
neighbors to
K and I'm going to say visually that is
this one and honestly I'm not really
sure uh which one is closer of these two
I would probably guess uh maybe this one
my orange line is definitely shorter but
but it doesn't quite Go the whole
distance but let's just say it was
closest to that second one there so with
K2 you've got two points that are the
closest so we've got basically two
points are saying Yep this is a plus but
what if you had a point that was maybe
here you might have a case where what
are the two closest uh points by
K2 well uh you would have probably this
point here and this point here right
those are the two closest points and
when K you know with when the nearest
neighbors go to basically place a vote
on the what the identity of this point
is uh we have a split vote vote okay so
in general when you do K nearest
neighbors you're probably not going to
want to have k equals 2 or any other
even number you're going to want k equal
to some odd number in this case we'll do
three so what if we did three what if we
said okay we need one more Point well we
would say okay it's this one so then
basically the vote would be um negative
negative and positive that's a two out
of three so we would say it's the class
is actually a negative class that's what
we would end up going with here and so
that's basically how K nearest neighbors
Works uh it's it's a super simple
algorithm and the other thing you have
to think about too is in this case we
had only two groups but what if you had
three groups is K3 going to be a a good
idea turns out no because you could have
a total split amongst all the groups
what about four no because you could
have a totally even vote so if you had
three groups you need at least five
total uh you know k equals 5 to avoid
any sort of split vote you can also code
something in to just randomly pick if
there is a a division what's neat about
K nearest neighbors though is not only
can you get an actual uh
classification for uh the data point
that you pick you can get what we were
talking about before both accuracy in
the model so that you can train and test
the model for the model's overall
accuracy but each point can also have a
degree of confidence so for example what
if you get you you're using k equal 3
and you get a vote that is like a a
negative negative and a positive well
that's a two out of three right so
that's a you know
66% confidence in the score or in the in
the classification of that data but not
only is it 66% um is the confidence 66%
but you can also have the entire K
nearest neighbors model that you've
trained you can have that accuracy so
this would actually be more like
confidence and that's why I wanted to
change uh when we were doing linear
regression why I didn't want to call it
confidence I wanted to call it accuracy
because confidence with K nearest
neighbors is something you can actually
value and it can indeed be very
different from the entire model's actual
accuracy so um so that's kind of cool
with with K nearest neighbors now what
are some downfalls of K nearest
neighbors well as we're going to see uh
in order to find out who are the closest
neighbors what we're using to measure
that distance is just simple ukian
distance is what we're going to be using
here and to to do that to find the ukian
distance uh the most simple method is
actually to to to measure the distance
between any uh given point and all of
the other points and then you just say
okay what are the closest three or
whatever K is and as you might guess on
a huge data set that's a very very long
and tedious operation there are a few
things that you can do to kind of speed
it up but no matter what you do to speed
this up you're going to find that the
larger the data set the worse this
algorithm runs because it's just not not
as um efficient as other algorithms and
then and so once we cover this and then
we get into maybe like the support
Vector machine you'll see that the
support Vector machine is much more
efficient when it comes to actual uh
classification also with K nearest
neighbors um you're basically there's
never really a point where you're
totally training anything like the
training and testing is basically the
same the same spot or the same basically
the same thing because when you go to
actually test you're comparing it to all
the points there's really no good way to
to train a simple K neighbors algorithm
um there also some things that we can do
down the line but we probably won't be
getting into that ourselves but anyway
just keep in mind that the scaling is
not so good and we'll point out exactly
why and then when we get into support
Vector machines you'll see why support
Vector machines scale so much better
than K near neighbors that said I don't
mean to to to to brag on K nearest
neighbors too much it's actually a more
than fine algorithm for many
classification tasks so if you're even
if you're working up to maybe a gigabyte
worth of data K nearest neighbors can
still be calculated quite fast and it
can also be easily calculated in
parallel since any any point you're
trying to predict can be calculated um
regardless of the other points that
you're trying to calculate so it's
actually um you can you can thread it
and still scale relatively well but if
you're working with you know billions of
data points uh it's not going to it's
not going to do you very well so anyways
um that is the theory and intuition
behind K nearest neighbors and now we're
going to actually be diving in uh to a
real world example of K nearest
neighbors then after that we'll actually
write our own K nearest neighbors
algorithm so stay tuned for that if you
have any questions or comments leave
them below otherwise as always thanks
for watching thanks for all the support
and subscriptions and until next time


what is going on everyone and welcome to
another machine learning tutorial in
this tutorial what we're going to be
doing is continuing along with
classification and specifically right
now we're talking about K nearest
Neighbors which takes any new data point
and just
compares the quite literally ukian
distance between that point and the
other data points to determine which
which class it happens to belong to by
comparing in its kind of distance from
one class to another class basically so
uh we're going to be using pyit learn to
do this and then we're going to use a
data set from um from the uci.edu data
set so here we go so um let's just this
is for University of California at
Irvine I believe is UCI okay so this is
the website if I happen to forget it's
relatively simple archive. i. uci.edu
ml/ sets. HTML
they have a ton of data sets here
they've got them um I'll even scroll up
here they've got them separated by tasks
that you would perform with this data
set like classification regression
clustering other they've got attribute
types data types the area like kind of
environment right like Sciences
engineering social sciences and so on
how many attributes um and then how many
instances so probably samples here
anyway um there you have that it's a
great site for practicing machine
learning and the data set that we're
going to use is the breast cancer data
set we're going to go with the original
one I've already got that up though so
that would bring you to a page like this
and then you'd be interested in the data
folder which would open up this page and
then if you click both of these you'll
get this and this so the first one is
the actual data um that corresponds to
the breast cancer set so we will'll
right click and save that and I'm going
to save it in the folder or the thing
that we're working in which is this
right here
Reading the data
and then the second one actually yeah
I'll just save it there the second one
is we don't really need to save it but
you want to read these because this
gives you a little bit more information
on the data set itself primarily first
of all you got the citation request also
um you have coming let's see past usage
you can learn about like who's used it
and stuff like that and then basically
we're looking for yeah right here so the
names right we didn't know what which
one of these like what anything was U
but if you come down here you can see so
the First Column is just sample code
number um basically an ID the second
column is Clump thickness and then
uniformity of cells size shape and so on
you keep going down the list and then
finally uh the 11th attribute is
actually the class which is either
benign or malignant for the tumor so
benign or malignant is an attribute but
that's also what we're actually trying
to predict for so we're going to
actually make that um the class or the
label so to speak so anyways that's our
data we've downloaded the data I have it
now uh let's see if it's yeah down here
so I'll open that
up and so here's the data and what I'm
going to go ahead and do is add a header
row here we could do this in pandas but
it's probably easier just to type it in
really quick here so uh we know the
first thing is ID Clump uncore thickness
and you'll definitely want to be doing
this along along with me um and then I'm
going to say UNIF cell size UNIF
cell shape and I'm going to scroll like
this here or
something let's do that then this okay
UNIF cell shape and then what do we have
next we have
Marge
adhesion single
epith cell I think that's saying size
I'll guess uh be whoops be
nuclei Bland oops
Bland Chom we'll just stick with that
Norm
nucleoli
mitoses and then finally class and so
hopefully we have the write a number
here so ID 2 3 4 five six
7 8 9 10 11 Okay cool so the thing that
to pay a little bit of attention to will
save this is that um 11 is a class two
means the tumor is benign four means
it's malignant um so you'll actually see
later when we go to code this ourselves
you most machine learning algorithms
don't want the class to be a a string
right it's supposed to be a number so
this is how you can convert it but later
on I'll show you you can kind of get
away with using a string but anyway um
for the most part you're going to be
using like numpy or some other really
optimized library that does number
crunching and that's going to want
numbers not a string so um the other
thing to pay attention to is this says
it does indeed have missing attributes
there's 16 missing and if they are
missing it's denoted by a simple
question mark also you get the uh class
distribution here which just says
basically we've got 458 benign tumors
and 241 of them are malignant so it's
not totally a balanced data set but it
might actually be um more realistic in
terms of how many are benign or
malignant I'm not really sure um but
hopefully more people have benign tumors
than malignant so anyways that's the
data set we can rename it and now let's
go ahead and load it in um to what we're
working in so just remember that name
and if hopefully it's saved in the local
directory so let me move all this stuff
over I'll put this down here here and um
Handling missing data
so the first thing we need to do is
handle for the missing and bad data but
first let's go ahead and uh make some
required Imports so import numpy as MP
from sklearn we're going to import
preprocessing cross validation and
neighbors so you should recognize
pre-processing already we've already
covered that cross validation already
covered that neighbors is new but you
can probably guess what that's going to
be used for and then we're going to
finally import pandas as PD again we've
already kind of been using that so first
of all we're going to load in that um
that CSV or actually it's just a text
file but we'll treat it like a CSV
because that's basically what it is
we're going to load that into a data
frame so pd. reor
CSV and uh the name is breastcancer
wisconsin. data so I'm just going to
copy and paste that that's the
name um we'll read that in and we
already know out of the gate we have
some missing dat data that is denoted by
a question mark so let's go ahead and
replace that information so we're going
to say DF do
replace and we're going to replace all
question marks with a
99,999 and then we're going to say
whoops comma comma in place equals true
so that just modifies the data set or
the data frame right away and then
remember before I was asking um is there
any um you know you want to watch out
for useless data and in this case what
might be useless data well when looking
at the data set here the First Column is
ID does ID have any um implication as to
whether or not a tumor is benign or
malignant um the answer of course is no
so we don't want the ID column that's a
completely useless column and it's going
to lead our algorithm astray unless I
happen to forget we'll uh we're going to
get rid of it for now but later we'll
bring it back just so you can see how
much Havoc that might wreak on uh on our
algorithm here especially K nearest
neighbors other algorithms might handle
for outliers better but you'll see how
bad K nearest neighbors handles for
outliers so anyway DF do drop and we're
going to drop what we're going to drop
um put that in Brackets the ID column
pretty sure you can get away with just
string but I know brackets will work
anyway one there and then in place
equals true so we're dropping the ID
column now as you can remember before uh
we're going to Define our x's and y's um
also I believe I've already explained
thetive
99,999 the whole point of that is just
so most algorithms will recognize that's
an outlier and we'll treat it like an
outlier as opposed to dumping the data
again a lot of real world data sets have
a lot of missing data just just a ton of
holes to the point where if you were to
drop everything with missing data you
would maybe sacrifice 50% % of your data
set or something like that it's you
don't want to do that and you don't have
to do that so anyway we do this to make
it just a huge outlier basically at
least for that specific um point now
with K nearest neighbors
um this really doesn't do too much try
to Envision like if you just had
two-dimensional data plus the class try
to Envision what
99,999 would do um that's really
significant so the only time you would
ever identify probably with a class that
had
a if you if your current one or your
current um feature set has this would be
comparing it to another feature set that
also almost certainly has one of those
but anyway we're going to have that
there so maybe in this case you might
want to actually say zero or something
like that you just kind of keep that in
mind um depending on how you want to do
it we we'll see that this probably won't
have a huge effect anyway also we only
had 16 so you could in theory rather
than replacing the question mark you
could do DF do drop
na in place equals true um and just get
rid of those so anyway that's really it
comes down to opinion and also your
specific data set and the algorithm that
you're going to use but anyway we're
going to do it this way so now we're
going to Define X and Y so we've got X
and Y again capital x is for your
features Y is for your labels or your
class or whatever so X is going to be
np. array and we're going to do
basically the exact same thing that we
did before um when we were using um
linear regression so the features are
basically everything except for the
class column class DF drop class comma 1
and then uh the label is basically just
the class right so NP
array DF
class so now we have our features and
our labels now we're going to do the
cross
validation so again X
train uh
X
test y train y test equals cross
validation. train test whoops train test
split and we're going to split what X
and Y and the test size uh will be 0.2
So 20% feel free to change that if you
want but um this line again we've
already covered it that's just how we
can quickly Shuffle the data and
separate it into um training and testing
chunks that meet our our
hopes so now we're going to define the
classifier so you've already seen this
before
so not fit yet classifier equals uh
neighbors.
k
neighor
classifier k neighbors classifier okay I
think I spelled that right so we've
defined the classifier now we can fit so
cf. fit and then we fit what well we fit
the XT train and Y train again all this
code is almost identical to when we did
the linear regression code that's what's
really just so nice about ssit learn is
even with different machine learning
algorithm um I hate to say classes but
really they are classes right before it
was regression and regression is totally
different from uh classification but as
far as scikit learn is concerned it's
basically the same thing so we fit um
the the data and then of course we can
immediately test it with um we'll call
this accuracy
equals cf. score X test y test and again
we're we're calling this accuracy I may
forget to change it in the written
version but um we call it we want to
call it accuracy and not confidence like
I a lot a lot of times I want to call it
confidence but really it's the accuracy
because we can also measure confidence
as I already kind of explained in the
theory part um with Kor Neighbors when
it comes down to the vote basically so
there's our accuracy and then we'll
print
accuracy and uh let's go ahead and save
and run
that it's taking a while to pop up but
there it is let's pull it down
here um it's telling me the file does
not
exist sure it does
liar maybe it's do oh I know what it is
so I I downloaded that data but it's
actually I bet it's . dat. text let's
try
that yeah interesting okay so with um
just with the defaults and all of that
our accuracy is 0964 which is
96.4% that's huge accuracy now of course
like I said before with the self-driving
car and all that um differentiating
between a baby and a blanket and a
blobar on the road um I don't know about
you but I don't want to be told that I
do or don't have cancer even with a 4%
um inaccuracy right I want like 99 plus%
um but probably you know I would go off
a test that was 96.4% accurate now that
now I'm thinking about it let me comment
out the dropping of the ID column and
let's just see what this does bam
massive like we're almost to flipping
coin status just by including the ID
column that is that's just that's
huge
Prediction
okay so finally the next thing that
we're going to go ahead and do is um
we're going to make a prediction so
let's say you you've trained this
classifier in most cases especially if
you trained on a huge amount of data
what we would pickle the classifier
immediately we just save it to a pickle
um but I'm not going to do that every
single time so if you want to know how
to save classifiers go back to that one
this just trains and tests so fast it's
not really that necessary um so anyways
now let's make an example um to predict
prct so let's say example
measures equals and this is going to be
a numpy
array and let's just make some up so
let's say 4 2 1 1 1 2 3 2 1 so first
thing we're going to do is uh let me
pull this over so what what ought that
um predict because so keep in mind this
is the first few minus the ID and also
minus the class so it would be like the
numbers here so a
four so automatically like looking at
this it looks like this first colum is
kind of higher for um what I believe to
be malignant I think four was malignant
if I recall right um anyway it's a four
class every time that's pretty high
that's a four so you can look at that
but also the other numbers seem to be in
line with the two class also I mean you
can make up your own if you want just go
ahead and search the document and make
make sure that does not exist 42111 2
321 right that set of attributes does
not occur anywhere in this document
therefore it's Unique it's never been
seen before so we're going to test on
that so there you have that and now to
do a prediction prediction equals cf.
predict you've also seen this already
with linear regression so again it's
just so it's just the same no matter
what type of algorithm you're doing
which is it's just nice um and then
print uh we're going to print the
prediction and we're probably going to
get either a warning or an error here
but I'll explain that next I didn't want
to add that to the list oh let's see
example measure okay so example
measures I got an error because of
that
bummer okay so we're actually getting an
error that I didn't expect to
get
[Music]
oh oh let's see let's see let's see see
um what we're doing I forgot to
uncomment out the ID column so let me go
back because I am confident now that
we'll get our prediction sure enough
there we go okay ha so what what tipped
me off was that our accuracy was still
56% okay so now our accuracy is
98.5% and we did get our prediction but
you'll see we got this this this uh
deprecation warning that it wants us to
reshape our um our data before the
problem was we were passing an incorrect
number of attributes um because we we we
had one more because of the ID column
okay anyway uh fixed but now to get rid
of that value error we would do this um
and then run
it and then now you don't have the
stupid um deprecation warning so um that
makes things maybe a little more complex
so I just want to before we zip away
we're done with K nearest neighbors but
now we're talking about working withit
learn and also numpy as far as reshaping
and and shapes are concerned and I think
Reshaping
it's important to understand how this
works because it's going to come up so
um so in this case we had one sample so
we had one negative one so what if we
had two samples like what if it was like
this like copy
this um let me think here I think we can
get away with it's got to be a list of
lists so it would be a list of lists
we'll do comma paste and now I've got
two and let's change this to like two
and then this to to
two and
um so we've got basically we've got two
samples so noting the directions we had
before this was for one
sample so we're going to change that to
two right so let's go ahead and save and
run that
and you'll see we got our two
predictions two and a two so it was able
to do that but then what happens when uh
when you have an unknown number like you
might have an unknown number of
predictions maybe this week you've got
15 patients maybe next week you've got
45 patients right um that's going to be
very common and you want to actually you
don't want to have to hardcode the shape
every single time so what you're going
to need to do is rather than um when you
go to reshape at least program wise I
don't know any better way like make
converting like a list of lists or
making a list of lists based on a data
set super easy converting to an Umpire
aray super easy I'm not sure how to
properly shape it um automatically to
the the shape that uh psyit learn wants
but what you can do is once you've made
this list of lists once you're ready to
convert uh you've converted it already
to an ire array once you're ready to
reshape all you have to do is you've got
measures. reshape here we're going to
say rather than reshaping to
2-1 you just replace two with um the Len
of example
measures right and now example measures
can be any length right we'll still run
it and we'll still get a report back
that is 2 two and that is how you can um
program it in to just automatically um
predict on any number of predictions and
again this is not K nearest Neighbors
specific this is any uh any of the
scikit learn classifiers and then in
general just how to properly reshape
your numpy array um for a variety of
reasons but that's just one of the
reasons why you would is so you can feed
it through psyit learn okay so there's
your real world example we found that we
can predict based on you know somewhere
between 94 and 98% accuracy which is
pretty impressive especially now that
you know the intuition of how simple K
nearest neighbors is um and now what
we're going to do is actually write our
very own K nearest neighbors algorithm
and then what we can do is we'll we'll
run it on these exact same data and then
we'll see how we compare to scikit learn
now just thinking logically here um
knowing how simple K nearest neighbors
is and exactly how it works already uh
should we perform accuracy
wise similarly or exact or what compared
to scikit learn so think about that and
the next video we'll actually start
writing our own uh kers neighbors
algorithm from scratch so if you have
any questions or comments leave them
below otherwise as always thanks for
watching thanks for all the support
subscriptions and until next time

what is going on everybody and welcome
to part 15 of the machine learning with
Python tutorial Series in this tutorial
we're going to be building on the last
couple which we talking about K nearest
neighbors we talked about the intuition
it's basically how close is this point
to the K closest points and whatever the
majority classes of those K closest
points we say this new point is that
class and in the previous tutorial
exactly what we did was apply K nearest
neighbors to real world data set and we
found that it's actually fairly accurate
which was very cool so now we're going
to break down the K near neighbors
algorithm and rewrite it ourselves from
scratch in code but first we have to
cover what everything hinges on right it
hinges on this distance so what is that
distance it is ukian distance so what is
ukian distance it's of course named
after uid famous mathematician popul
Lally referred to as the father of
geometry definitely wrote the book on it
right UK's elements uh which is arguably
the Bible for mathematicians and
scientists um also fun fact is you know
whenever someone would would create a
printing press the first thing you'd
start popping out was the Bible of
course and then the second thing was
most likely ucd's elements so anyways um
what is ukian distance first we have it
Euclidean Distance
is the
sum uh to n and in this case n
represents the number of
dimensions in your data so just think of
it as in this case as Dimensions but
really this means sum to n where I
starts off at least as being equal to
one okay so it really just means I
starts as one goes up to n where I
actually uh is your Dimensions so if you
just have one dimension it would just
you would just do this one time and it's
the sum of what and in in uh let's do
parentheses here it is going to be q i
minus p
i squared and then this entire
calculation we do the square root of it
and this is ukian distance so I is just
the dimensions Q is one point p is a
different point right so this would in
theory if you just if you got rid of N
and I you got rid of the whole sum and
you just left the parentheses part like
if you just left
um I hate to Circle it CU I want to mess
it up but if you just left the whole
parentheses squared this would be that
would be the calculation for a
one-dimensional distance between two
points in ukian space anyways but now
let's actually break this down into
simple mathematics I always like to do
it by hand first some things we won't
always do by hand we won't actually do
the calculation but I'll show you how
you would plug it in at least so we'll
Calculating Distance
start off and say Q is equal to 1A 3 so
these are the coordinates for our data
point and then P the coordinates for p X
and Y so this is two Dimensions is
25 those are the coordinates so then how
would we calculate the ukian distance
well it's going to be the square root of
basically a couple things so we know we
have two Dimensions so we know that
basically what's going to start off as
will be something like uh it'll be you
know the square root without that dot
there square root and we know we're
going to have at least two of
these right because we got two
Dimensions here we recall it's the
summation of these so it'll be a plus
here and then this will be squared and
this will be squared and then we just
need to fill in the uh subtractions so
initially it'll be
q1 - P1 so it would be 1 - 2 right 1
and then over here we'll just put a
three and then it's minus minus 2 and
five and that would be the ukian
distance okay so simple enough let's
head over to Python and actually create
this so in Python here let's just
Python Implementation
recreate exactly what we just did by
hand so on instead of Q and P let's say
plot one equals and we'll do 13 and plot
2 = 25 okay okay now we're going to uh
let's go up to the top and say from math
import sqrt which is just importing the
square root so um coming back down here
converting this to ukian distance or
basically calculating the ukian distance
between these two plots is the following
so
ukian uncore distance equals
sqrt so remember it's the square root
of the sum of each of the dimensions
minus that same dimension in each of the
plots or two plots really you're going
to calculate distance between two plots
so in this case it would be for example
plot one the zeroth element so the x of
plot one minus the x of plot two right
so minus plot two and the X so the zero
is okay so that's one and remember it
was the sum of all of these so it would
be that plus do and then basically the
exact same thing only instead of the
zeroth it would be the one all right so
0 1 one so you can think of these as
your Dimensions right so this is
dimension zero and this is dimension one
so this is two Dimensions as indeed it
is so that would be the i in that
equation just for the record so anyways
ukan distance boom done let's go ahead
and oh these also need to be squared so
uh that squared and this
squared right so that is squared this is
squared and then the entire
operation is uh we get to grab the
square root of that so now let's
print the ukian
distance so we get 2.23 60 and so on but
basically that is your ukian distance so
now that we know how to calculate ukian
distance we basically have the Crux of
everything we need uh to do K nearest
neighbors uh but we have kind of like a
lot of framework to create regardless so
uh that's what we're going to be doing
in the next tutorial is creating the
framework that will take a data set and
use kers neighbors to classify a point
so if you have any questions or comments
up to this point feel free to leave them
below otherwise as always thanks for
watching thanks for all the support and
subscriptions and until next time

what is going on everybody Welcome to
part 16 of our machine learning with
Python tutorial Series in this tutorial
actually in the previous tutorials we've
been talking about K nearest neighbors
we talked about the intuition which is
basically the class of any given point
is based on the vote of K let's say k
equals 3 so the three closest data
points to it and then we talked about in
the previous tutorial that that
closeness is measured by ukian dist
and then also we showed the accuracy
overall of K nearest neighbors is
actually very impressive so uh in this
tutorial we're actually now getting to
the point where we're we're going to
write our own K nearest neighbors
algorithm so um the first thing that
Import Numpy
we're going to go ahead and do is I'm
going to remove this stuff
here and um we're going to add some new
Imports here so first I'm going to say
import
numpy as n and we're going to be using
numpy um especially here we're going to
actually change this ukian distance
formula to use numpy nump turns out
actually has a built-in um function that
will calculate ukian distance for us the
reason I chose not to use it is it's not
as obvious as this this is very clearly
the square root of X1 - X2 squar plus
the squared value of y1 - Y 2^ 2 right
that it's very obvious this way but with
numpy it's not so obvious but we're
going to use numpy because it's faster
but again the whole reason I I wanted to
break down the formulas for you all was
so you have a better understanding of
how it actually works and using numpy
right out of the gate you wouldn't
probably as easily understand how it
works so anyways that's why I did it
that way but we'll keep that there for
now but we are going to bring in numpy
here pretty
quickly um then we're going to say uh
Import Style
report matplot li. pyplot as
PLT uh from map plot lib we're going to
import style from collections we're
going to import uh counter which is how
we're going to do the votes basically
then we're going to do style uh. use and
we're going to say
538 Also let's we're going to import
warnings import warnings uh and this is
so we can warn the user when they're
attempting to use a dumb number for K so
now um we're going to get rid of this
and we'll leave ukan distance here for
now but um and in fact let's
just uh I don't know what I want to do
with it I think I'm I'm just going to
delete it for now we'll rewrite it
anyway so now let's say we have a data
set where and we're going to make this a
dictionary and I'm going to kind of
cheat a little bit um so we can make
things actually kind of easy easier down
the line but we're going to say this is
a class we're going to say the class of
K the K class is the following it is a
list of lists and the list in here is
actually um coordinates or or I hate I
we're not going to call them coordinates
I apologize these are features we're
going to call them features this is a
machine learning tutorial I'm thinking
about plotting them anyways um so this
one has and these are going to be two-
dimensional features so the K the
features of K are 1 and two uh two and
three
and 3 and one okay so those are features
that correspond to the class of K now uh
we're going to have another value which
will be R that's the the class that's
the label and that label whoops it's not
a dictionary it is uh corresponds again
to the same number of features we have
three features for R and those features
are
65 uh we'll do 7 seven and eight
six okay so we have two classes here and
their
features okay so um and then let's say
down the line we have a new point or new
we'll say new features I'll probably
forget that later on but new features is
probably better um better worded 57 so
that's the new Point 57 now looking at
this visually you can probably already
surmise uh which one this this better
belongs to um so you can take a wild
guess but and don't worry soon enough
we'll actually we'll write this
algorithm and then we'll apply it to a
more realistic data set but this is just
simple data set for
Graphing
now and I'm going to write a a oneline
for Loop that's going to graph this so
let's say we're going to say PLT do
scatter uh and we're going to
scatter let's see PLT scatter and we're
going to say i i z actually you know
what I'm going to do first let me write
it out so let's say you had 4 I in data
set 4 i i in data
set I so we're iterating through you
know for I and data set I corresponds to
K and R and then for I I and data set I
that would be for each um feature set
basically so for II we're going to do
PLT do
scatter I
I um zero comma I I 1
s = 100 color equals I and that is why I
use those so so so how might you uh
break this back down to be a oneliner
for Loop you would just you could do um
basically this so PLT uh do scatter that
um I color equals I and then do this for
I I in data set
I and
[Music]
then for I in data set okay that's
usually how I build a oneliner anyway so
that should do uh what we want to
do and then let's go ahead and PLT doow
to see our
data where are
you there it is okay so there we have
our data and again it's pretty simple to
see kind of what we're working with and
in fact we can even do uh here PLT do
[Music]
scatter
um I think we'll have to do
this
Z
one okay that was pretty small we should
have done size equals 100 but you get
the point so just looking at it visually
we're probably thinking okay that
belongs to the red group
right so um so we have our data we're
scattering that data just so we could
visualize it um but now let's get
started with defining the K nearest
neighbors algorithm so I'm going to
comment this out for now but we at least
wanted to see our data so we know that
eventually we want to have K nearest
neighbors as a we'll do a function and
in order to calculate K neighbors we
need to pass through data right this is
the training data basically and then we
need to pass through whatever we're
trying to predict right and then we need
a value for K okay and for now we're
going to default K to equal to three
which is the same I believe asit learns
K nearest neighbors it might be five but
we'll look at that when we come to it so
then what we're going to say is for
example um we know that eventually what
we want to have is if Len data is less
than uh or is greater than or equal to k
i if we have
more um cuz we're going to pass through
a dictionary
right and the length of a dictionary
like the length of this dictionary here
is two it has two basically Keys okay so
that would be two so if the length is
greater than or equal to the value of K
that we choose we're going to um just
send the user or Warnings so we're going
to say warnings. Warn and then we're
just going to say you're dumb never mind
we're going to say k is set to a value
less than total voting groups something
like that
idiot just kidding okay so anyway you
can leave idiot there if you like and
then and then we're going to do you know
special KNN alos and then we're going to
return the the the results and it's
probably going to be a vote result so
we're going to say vote results
okay so that's the starting point of our
K near neighbors algorithm and um I'm
going to go ahead and cut it off here
and in the next tutorial uh we'll
continue building this uh to the point
where hopefully we can pass out data and
actually get that vote result and
probably bring at least this one to a
close and then we can test it on real
data so anyways if you have questions
comments concerns whatever post some
below otherwise as always thanks for
watching thanks for all the support
subscriptions and until next time

what is going on everybody and welcome
to part 17 of our machine learning
tutorial series we've been working on K
nearest neighbors and let's get into it
don't want to waste any more time here
so we've started creating this K nearest
neighbors function all we've done so far
though is just warn the user when
they're trying to do something stupid so
now we actually need to create the K
nearest neighbors part calculate who are
the K nearest neighbors what are their
class what is the class of whatever
we're predicting based on the comparison
to the data okay so what we need to do
how how how could we do this how can we
compare a data point to the other data
points to find out who is the closest
data point and there in lies the problem
with K nearest neighbors to do this we
have to compare the prediction point to
all other points in the data set that's
the problem with K nearest neighbors now
there are actually some additional
things we can do call you can do what's
called a radius so you can look within a
certain radius of a point and then you
can kind of like forget the
outliers um and that can save you a
little bit on the calculation of like
ukian distance you can find out much
easier is a point inside or outside a
radius than you can to calculate the
ukian distance okay so anyways um we're
not going to get into that but just keep
in mind that this is the problem with
Kate neighbors so what we're going to do
is we're just going to
grab a basically a list of lists of the
distances so what we're going to say is
um you might say something like this
like you might say uh distances equals a
list and then you're going to say uh for
group in
data uh and so that would be like for
each keep in mind data um is whatever
you pass through here but in this case
it would be this data set so for each
group so for each class basically so for
group group in in data for features in
group um or rather features in data
group derp data group so this was now
iterating through the features
here what do we want to do well we need
to calculate ukian distance right and I
got rid of the ukian distance so um in
order to save y'all time I'm not going
to write it out I'm just going to copy
and paste here because we're not going
to actually use this version but going
with the version that I wrote previously
we would say that right square root of
featur Z minus um predict Z squared plus
features 1 minus predict one squared and
then take the whole square root of that
right that is the equivalent of what we
wrote earlier unfortunately that is not
that is that's the algorithm but it's
not fast it's not a very fast
calculation so I mean on our data set it
would be lightning fast fast and
probably on the breast cancer set it
would be pretty fast but in this case no
so so we we definitely want to change it
so what we're going to change it to is
for example this would be a faster
version also the other problem here
is what if you have this works with two
Dimensions but what if you had three
dimensions right this will not change
this is hardcoded to only do K nearest
Neighbors on two two feature
Dimensions bummer all right there are
few things that we could do to to
counteract this specifically with like a
a for Loop would do it like a oneline
for Loop could figure it out um but to
counteract for a a dynamic number of
features you could do something like
this so first of all we're using a numpy
square root we're using numpy's version
of sum and then we're also using numpy
arrays where we can actually just
subtract numpy arrays Square those numpy
arrays and um perfect we get the same
value for ukian distance here as well
but we're going to go ahead and not use
that one either because turns out that
numpy even has a more simple version and
that would be the following um I guess
this one I'll I'll write out because
you're this is the one you're going to
need to write out so it's ukian distance
equals np. Lin alge or it's basically
linear algebra Lal right. Norm okay it's
just another name basically for what
we're going to do here which is ukian
distance so this is the norm of np.
array and we're we're going to say
features right this is features
corresponding with features
minus um wait did we yeah minus np.
array predict okay and this obviously no
longer does it look like that the ukian
distance formula and that's why I did
not want to use this initially because
this is you're just you're kind of
cheating using this like this is much
higher level so anyways um but we're
going to use it because it's faster but
I did want to show you the the true way
to write it if you if you needed to Okay
so we've done
that and now what we're going to say
is
um let's do oops hit my mouse let's do
over here so we've got oh actually what
we need to do is now we need to do
distances. append and we're going to
append the following we're going to
impend a list so we're going to say U
whatever the ukian
distance happens to be and then we're
going to pend the group so it's the dis
distance it's the distances and then the
group so it's going to be a list of
lists where the first item in the list
is the actual distance second one's the
group this way we can sort that list
take the the the three things in that
list and then get the first element and
those are groups that's my thinking so
now we're going to come down here and
we're going to say uh the votes
equals um
so I guess let me explain how I'm going
to do this first so again I'm going to
use a oneliner for Loop but I'll explain
I guess I'll explain I'll write this one
out and then I'll explain it so
basically it is going to be the votes is
equal to
i1 so again i1 is the group once we know
what the top three distances are we
don't actually care what the distance is
we just care about it because we want to
be able to rank the distances after
we've done that and gotten the top three
or the best close distances we don't
care what the distance was so i1 for I
in sorted
distances to K right because after we've
sorted the distances we only care about
the distances to K so it would almost be
the votes are equal to for distance I
I one but this just allows us to
populate votes as a list that is just
simply the the the um the groups right
or the categories labels whatever you
want call it class so there you have
votes and then we're going to say the
vote result is equal to
counter of the votes most common and how
many of the most common do we care about
we just care about the first one the one
that is the most common and then we're
going to take z z so most common it
gives you like a first of all it's it
comes as like an an array of a list so
you take zero first and you get the list
and then you take the zeroth again
because that list tells you what the
most common how many there were or the
most common group and then how many
there were so there's two things in it I
think it's actually a tuple of an array
I can't remember anyway it's like that
so we're going to take those so and in
fact I mean we could
print just so you can see counter votes.
most common just so you can not take my
word for it okay so so then you've got
vote result we return vote results and
we've done K nearest neighbors so now
let's say we actually want to run this
darn thing and we're going to say
results equals and let's just copy this
copy paste we're going to pass through
data
set we want to predict on the new
features and we're going to say k equals
3 no problem okay and now let me print
results so we'll also get this other
print out but that'll be okay and then
we'll maybe get an error even if we're
lucky nope no error cool so it's
actually a list of a tuple okay good
thing I printed it out soz I I guess I
was making it up so what we get here is
that the return is um that it's a the
the most Val or the most voted thing was
R it turns out k equals three so all
three were R and of course the vote
result is R so we get that the class
back of this data point right here is an
R type which as we already saw like we
kind of expected that to be the case so
good so now
um there's a couple of things that we
want to do first of all we might want to
compare it to S kit learns um version
the other thing we could do I mean like
we could print or like we could graph
this just for example so let me do we
could take this Co copy come down here
paste and I'll take this away
and new features so instead yeah we can
plot that and then uh is it color yeah
color
equals
results I think we'll get away with that
so if we do that right we just need to
change the size but that was the new
point right and so indeed it classified
it in the correct group so now what we
want to do is we want to compare that to
scikit learns version of uh K nearest
neighbors okay so we're going to we're
going to use this this K nearest
neighbors algorithm against that breast
cancer data and we're going to see how
well we compare to ssit learn so that's
what we're going to be doing in the next
tutorial so if you have any questions
comments concerns or whatever uh leave
them below otherwise as always thanks
for watching thanks for all the support
and the subscriptions and until next
time

what is going on everybody Welcome To
Part 18 of our machine learning with
Python tutorial Series in this tutorial
we're going to take the K nearest
neighbors algorithm that we wrote it
appears to be working and then we're
going to be testing it on some real
world data and we're going to use that
exact same data set that breast cancer
data set and then when we get our
accuracy back we're going to compare our
accuracy to the S kit learn accuracy to
see if we did about the same and what I
what I want you to think about is um
should we or should we not get either
identical or almost identical results or
or will the scikit learn classifier um
do much better than us under the same uh
let's say k equals 5 um parameter so
think about that as we go so the first
thing we're going to do is we're going
to clean up some stuff we're going to
get rid of this information here we're
going to get rid of the map plot lib
stuff we are not going to be graphing
there are way too many um way too many
dimensions for that
one also do we I was going to say I
thought how could we not have NP uh
we're going to add after collections
we're going to bring in uh import pandas
as PD and we're going to also import
random pandas so we can load in that
data set random um so we can Shuffle it
so we're going to shuffle that data set
because we're not using pyit learn at
all here uh we are doing this ourselves
from scratch okay so except for the
pandas part that's that would take way
too long but the algorithm okay anyway
um no one is amused anyway we'll get rid
of that too so it's just the function
and the
Imports so here um the first thing we're
going to do is DF equals pd. read CSV
whoops CSV and don't forget that CSV let
me just copy and paste it's that breast
cancer Wisconsin data copy paste and
don't forget the txt like I did that one
time now we're going to do DF do replace
of course just like before we get rid of
the question marks and we'll replace
them with
99,999 now that you understand K nearest
neighbors hopefully you understand what
I was explaining before about that
significant outlier that that distance
is quite
large so chances are under these C
circumstances the only time something
would compare to something like that is
if they shared um a missing data point
so anyway but we'll keep it there
anyways oh and we need Place equals true
uh let's see DF replace uh in place
equals
true now we're going to DF do drop and
we're dropping the ID column same
reasons as before that's a worthless
column and if you recall um accuracy
went down to like 56 or something
percent or was it 51 I can't even
remember it was very close to you know a
coin toss so U big deal there uh full
data we're going to say is DF do astype
float umv values. to list and the reason
I'm doing this is for some reason this
data frame like if I go print uh let's
do printf.
head and I'll just comment this out for
now hopefully we'll get what I'm trying
to show you uh I'm not seeing it but it
exists um for some reason some of these
were coming through as quotes maybe
because I've updated maybe it won't but
I'm pretty sure it will so we just want
to make sure we've converted it to float
everything in this data frame ought to
be an INT or a float it happens to most
everything here will be an INT but if
you wanted to reuse this code it would
need to be float most likely um so
anyway we're going to convert it to a
float um and then values. two list so
now um we've got the data now we're
going to shuffle the data now keep in
mind in this case we can Shuffle the
data because what we've done is we've
converted this to a list of list so for
example let me just print um full
data um and we'll do the first
10 and I think I hit
run here we go right okay so as you can
see there's the first elements and keep
in mind the two is if I recall right
benign and a four would be malignant but
I don't see a four at the moment um and
just uh let me do this real quick I just
want to you don't have to follow this I
just want to see cuz I knew this yeah so
so converting it to a list here you can
see like this one is in quotes it's it's
being treated as a string for some
reason so this com column for whatever
reason um is treated as a string
probably because it had a question mark
in it um but then again I don't know
because it's been replaced I I really
don't know why it's doing that but
anyway that's why we're saying as type
flow D Val to list so anyways there's
our data so um at this point we can
Shuffle this data and we're not losing
the um relationship of the features to
the label it's all part of the same list
right so we can Shuffle this and not
lose anything so now we're going to say
random.
Shuffle full data and just um to show
print let's do print full
data um we'll do to to to five and then
we'll print full data again to
five
after 20 pound signs
just to uh exemplify something so um I
just wanted to show that shuffle applies
you don't have to redefine so the first
one starts with 511 one2 and this one is
52 3 and so on so the shuffle works that
was something that always confused me
initially I would always try to do the
following I would try to redefine the
variable like full data equals random.
Shuffle full data that's that's not how
it how it works anyway um so that so we
we've shuffled the data
now and and um this is going to be our
version of train test split it's going
to be really high quality code so we're
going to say test size equals 0.2 and
then we're going to say the train
set is uh two colon empty list four
colon empty
list and then test set
equals two colon empty list we should
have just copied this for colon empty
list anyway uh transet set and then
we're going to say train uh train data
is equal to the full
data um whoops not parenthesis uh
brackets to the negative integer value
of the test size times the Len of
full data so we're just we're
multiplying the whole test size point2
we're we're using that to create an
index value and then we're just slicing
it based on that index value we've
converted it to an INT so it's a whole
number and all that fun stuff so we've
done that and let's just copy
this paste and now rather than colon
minus it would just be um minus
int um minus that basically two let's
see two
here so this would be everything up to
the last
20% of data and then um this will be
test we need to rename this test data
will be the last
20% of the data okay so now so we've
shuffled the data we've sliced the data
and now what we need to do is um
populate the dictionaries because our we
built this to want a dictionary so now
we're going to populate these
dictionaries and populating them them
super quick and easy because all we have
to do is the following um so we're going
to say 4 I in train data we could make a
oneline for Loop here we really ought to
but I'm not going to uh Trainor
set
um I basically this will be i1 what are
we doing here so we're saying train set
i1 which is neg the negative first
element in those remember the last
column is the class column that's why
we're using negative 1 that's the last
value so that is either a two or a four
right and weall two is benign four is
malignant so that's how we're
identifying which one of these in the
dictionary we want to be a part of so
transet um I -1 do append
append um I all the way to 1 so now we
are pending lists into this list and
that list is elements up to the last the
last element so again you wouldn't want
to have the one of the attributes being
the class because you would get it right
every time most likely K nearest
neighbors actually might not but um but
yeah you don't want to do that so now
we've done that now what we need to do
is basically the exact same thing only
for the test data so let's take this
copy
paste change train to test train set to
test
and you're
good now um and again you could make
this one line but uh I didn't want to do
that simply because of the I negative 1
that whole stuff that was kind of
confusing probably so anyways uh we're
done with that oops what has happened
come down here so we've populated our um
our dictionaries so what's left really
nothing we just need to pass the
information through to K nearest
neighbors so basically what we're going
to going to say is we're going to say
um let's measure um we'll say correct
equals z and total equals zero we're
just going to create a simple counter
here we're going to say is for group in
test set what do we want to do we're
going to say for data in test set group
so for each group in the test set so
this is test set so for each of these
two and four we're testing these and
then we're going to say for the data in
test set group so just that list of
features right so that's what we're
about to feed through to predict and
we're doing this just so predict is is
these lists from the test set right and
then as you might be able to guess what
we're going to pass through data which
goes here which we iterate through every
single point and calculate the distance
is going to be the dictionary from uh
the train set okay so for data in test
set group we're going to say the vote is
equal to K nearest
neighbors and we pass Train
Set uh that data which is the features
and we're going to say k equals 5 um
simply because if you look at the scikit
learn documentation for k your neighbors
they are using a default value of five
so we're going to copy
that then what we're all we have to ask
at this point to know if we were right
or wrong is if group equals vote right
if if the group that they that they came
from for the from the test set because
the test set we know what the answer is
so if that group is equal to the vote we
got from our K nearest neighbors
classifier
congratulations plus equals 1 for you
um otherwise or also what we need to do
is total plus equals 1 okay so um now
we're basically done so now we would
just print um maybe we would say uh
accuracy colon comma and then accuracy
is just the correct correct out of the
total so let's save and run that and see
we if we get any errors oh we shouldn't
be printing this out oh this is
disgusting okay it went pretty quick
anyway accuracy
978 so
97.8% accuracy boom look at us okay uh
I'm going to I'm going to comment that
out okay so um so we've applied it and
uh now what we want to do is compare
that uh let's run it one more time
without that nasty output we're going to
compare that so I ran it again
95.6% accuracy okay so now what I want
to do is have us uh compare this to uh
scikit learn so we're going to do that
and then also we're going to calculate
confidence uh and we're going to do that
in the next tutorial so if you have any
questions comments concerns whatever up
to this point feel free to leave them
below otherwise in the next tutorial
that's what we're going to do um also
thanks for watching thanks for all the
support and subscriptions and until next
time

What's going on everybody and welcome to
part 19 of our machine learning with
Python tutorial series. In this video,
we're going to be talking about K
nearest neighbors one last time before
we jettison off into the support vector
machine. What we're going to be talking
about here is K accuracy and
predictions. The first question we might
have is well what if we if we increased
Accuracy
K would accuracy
necessarily go up? So just for fun let's
um let's say K is equal to
25 and we run that. The previous
accuracy was about 95. Now we got 88 or
98 rather. Sorry, can't read for crap.
Run it again. Okay, 97. Run it again.
94. Run it again. Okay, you get the
point. So, we're still we're still doing
pretty good. What if we raise it to
75? 95%. Okay, we're still doing pretty
good. 97%. Still doing pretty
good. Okay, 93. That's one of our lower
numbers. Anyway, uh we don't really seem
I mean, we're still kind of the average
around here is about 97. So, um you
know, we could keep going. I forget how
many data points we actually have in
this uh set. Let's see. We actually have
600 about. So if we said K is equal to
200. So one of the closest 200 points uh
we see
accuracy actually appears to be
worse. So looking at more points and
actually probably what's happening there
is recall that we actually have a skewed
number. only like 30% were malignant
where right yeah 30% were malignant and
the other like 70% were benign. So uh
necess you know adding to K doesn't
necessarily do you any more of a favor.
A five is probably a pretty good um just
guess but depending on your data set and
all that you you might want to fiddle
with K just to see if it makes a huge
difference um and just test on whatever
data set you might have. So anyway
that's K. Next, we're going to be
talking about confidence versus
Confidence
accuracy. And K nearest neighbors can
give us confidence. So accuracy is did
we get the classification right? But
confidence actually can come from the
classifier. And the classifier can say,
hey, we have 100% of the votes in favor
of this class being such and such. Or
conversely, it can come back and say,
hey, we have only 60% of the votes. This
is what the vote was, but our confidence
is only 60%. Right. So um for example
you could create confidence and
confidence would be basically
this this and instead of that zeroith
element it would be the first. So it's
how many and then what would it be? It
would be divided by whatever k was
right. So you're hoping if you say k is
five you're hoping that this number is
five. Um, so anyways, there's that and
we'll just leave it like this simply
because
uh every every other like accuracy and
stuff is is the decimal form. So we're
not actually times it by 100. So you can
have confidence there and then you
literally could just do confidence.
Okay.
And we
can let's see
vote and then confidence would be here.
So let me make sure we get away with
that.
Right. So there you have that. And then
basically what we could do is we could
um you wouldn't want to do this all the
time, but you could print uh you know
vote result and uh not vote result
confidence. So there we go. So almost
all of these were a you know 1.0
confidence. This one was 80% but this
one was 60%. And the interesting thing
would maybe be to say uh vote confidence
if that is the case. Else print
um print the confidence. So every print
out of confidence. So we're going to
comment this
out. So all the numbers we're about to
see are the confidence scores of the
votes that we got
incorrect. So we'll run this.
Okay, so actually this is a pretty good
split here. Um, this wasn't these were
100% votes that were incorrect, but then
we also had some six votes that were
incorrect. Let's go up here and let's
maybe change the test size
to 04. We're going to sacrifice a lot of
data, so accuracy might actually go
down. But the question was in my mind um
would you see less 100% confidence if
uh if that in the incorrect valuations
and sure enough it appears um with a
this at least this test this was a
pretty even split but the ones that it
was unconfident about was 60%. So you
might even get to the point though where
let's say you have someone and you're
about and you're telling them whether or
not they have cancer. Okay, you're
telling them whether or not they have
cancer. Uh if the confidence is only
60%. You might have you might, you know,
not say anything, right? You might say,
well, the confidence of the test was not
accurate or whatever. Um or the test was
not confident, right? And so, you know,
that might be a reason why you might
want to take a little more care in uh
your reports. Anyways, so uh that's K's
Comparison
confidence and now comparison. So, what
I want to do is
um let's see what I want to do is take
this here and
um basically we're going to take this
and let's say for i in
range 25 and we're going to say for i in
range 25. We're going to do well
actually, yeah, we'll just we'll be
sloppy about it.
Whatever. Tab that over. And we're going
to say
accuracies equals a
list. And then here we're going to say
uh
accuracies.append that number. And then
when we're all done, we're going to say
print uh we're going to say len no
sum
accuracies divided by
len
accuracies. And let's just do 10. We'll
do five first just to make sure my
logic. Oh, we shouldn't have. I'm going
have to get rid of these
printouts, right? Okay. So, we'll get
rid of the printouts. And as we can see,
at least out of five tests, we're we
average 96.2% accuracy. And the other
thing we need to make sure, yeah, K is
indeed five. We'll stop printing
accuracy and we will stop uh where's the
other thing we were printing? Oh, it's
here. Else print confidence. Let's just
delete
that. Okay. So now um now we've got that
and we are getting different accuracies
just to show the whole process is being
repeated over again. So let's run this
um 25
times may not be enough for you. Um but
we'll run that 25 times and then let's
go to the other K nearest neighbors.
Let's say you don't have to follow along
if you don't want to by the way. You can
just see what the result is. I believe
that this is the other K nearest
neighbors from part 14.
What we could do is do basically the
exact same thing here. Right? So let's
take this here. Tab
over paste for iron range that I'm going
to tab. I'm going to stop this accuracy
stuff. And in fact, we don't need to do
predictions either. I'm going to leave
them there just in case I because this
is the old code actually. So I usually
upload this to GitHub. So anyway, we'll
save that. And then um
accuracies.append
accuracy and then we print um sum
accuracies divided by
len accuracies accuracies. Okay. So out
of 97 or I mean 97 out of uh
25 examples we ran a 96.4% 4% accuracy
on the version we wrote. Now, let's test
K nearest
neighbors. Okay, so this is the average
accuracy for K nearest neighbors,
96.8%. The only thing I will stress
though is the following. Keep in mind on
both of these, we're basically doing the
exact same thing. We're loading in the
data frame, we're passing the data,
we're training, we're testing, um, and
we're doing 25 iterations. So, so again,
let's run this
one. And it's still running. And I'm
going to go It's still running. I'll run
this one, too. And it there's your
answer there. And then we're still
waiting on the on the version we wrote.
And we're still
waiting. Oh man. Anyway, um so so what's
Differences
the difference? Okay, there's a couple
of differences here. One is uh K nearest
neighbors has a default parameter. Um
actually I think the default end jobs is
equal to one. Um but a couple of things
one k nearest neighbors can be threaded.
Okay so you do not have to test each
prediction point or like like in test
you had 20% of the sample right so when
you go to test each one each like set of
features is its own unique snowflake. So
you don't actually need to test
linearly. you can test all um test each
one on their own basically. So you can
heavily thread k nearest neighbors on a
bulk of predictions. So first of all you
can do that but I actually I think that
uh the default is that they do not let
me pull up scikitlearn's k nearest
neighbors for you guys. So here we go
and neighbors default five. Sure enough
radius this is most likely where
they're they're winning. They're beating
us because they're using that idea of
that radius to ignore points that are
outside the radius most likely. N jobs,
this is what we're talking about. So,
how many parallel jobs do you want to
run for the neighbor search? The default
is one, but if you set that to be
negative one, where are we? Here we are.
Then it will do as many jobs as
possible. So, that's another way to
actually speed it up. But, as you can
see, it was actually already pretty
fast. But this is not a high-erformance
tutorial in Python. This is a machine
learning tutorial, so if you want high
performance, you'll most likely be using
someone else's uh algorithm, but our
accuracy was actually very similar to
theirs. And I would wager that if if we
ran like a million samples, we would
find that accuracy was identical. It's
just 25 is not actually a decent sample
size. So anyways, that's all for K
nearest neighbors. A very valid
algorithm to use. is you can use it on
pretty like a lot of people say it
doesn't scale well, but it it scales to
very large data sets. It just doesn't
scale to like terabytes of data. It's
just not going to run very well on
terabytes of data. But you can use a
radius. You can thread it and it and it
actually still will run pretty well and
the accuracy is pretty good. So one of
the other upsides of the K nearest
neighbors classifier is that it can work
on both linear and
nonlinear data. So you'll see that that
makes a big difference especially in
something like the support vector
machine which is what we're covering
next. But um to use algorithms that
we've already covered you actually can
use regression to do classification so
long as you're using linear data. So,
for example, I've got a graph here. And
if I was to draw the best fit line, the
yhat line, the regression line for these
two data sets, I would probably do
something maybe like uh like this. Okay?
So, that would be for the blue dots. And
then I might do something like uh like
this for the orange dots. And then if I
had an unknown data point like let's say
maybe this point
here without using K nearest neighbors
instead what I could do is I could
measure the squared error between this
regression line and this regression line
and whichever one had a lesser squared
error that would be what class that new
Xplot belonged to which in this case
would be the orange the orange dot class
right so with regression if the data is
indeed linear you can still do
classification Right? You don't just
have to forecast out. Now, what about a
data set like this though? This data
set, both of these, the orange dots and
the blue dots do have a best fit line. I
have no idea what they are, but they do
have a best fit line. But even if they
did, even if when we when we did draw
the best fit line, uh the squared error,
the coefficient of determination would
be so poor. So, the actual, you know,
confidence of this algorithm would be
pretty bad overall. So you can't really
do classification
um on a data set like this. This is
nonlinear data. But you can do K nearest
neighbors on nonlinear
data. So you know we could still we can
classify this point using K nearest
neighbors because then we're just we're
measuring the distance between this
point probably this point and this point
and those are our closest three points.
We would get uh if K was equal to three
uh we have two to one vote. So we would
vote that it's an orange an orange dot
class, right? So anyways, that's one of
the other upsides to the K nearest
neighbors classifier. That's it for K
nearest neighbors. The next topic we're
going to be talking about is the support
vector machine. So that's what we're
going to be getting into. If you have
any questions, comments, concerns,
whatever, feel free to leave them below.
Otherwise, as always, thanks for
watching. Thanks for all the support and
subscriptions. And until next


hello everybody and welcome to part 29
of our machine learning with Python
tutorial series and a continuation on
the support Vector
machine in this tutorial we're going to
be talking about what to do when the
realities of the world hits you
so up until this point our support
Vector machine has been working with
linearly separable data now
unfortunately it's just the casee that
in the real world you are almost
certainly not going to get linearly
separable data it's just highly
unlikely so for example what we have
here is a two-dimensional feature set
with the classes plotted on you got the
plus class and the minus class here and
of course if I was to ask you okay what
what are the support vectors right you
would probably not know if I asked you
what's the best separating hyperplane we
we just don't have one it's not possible
right now with the way that we're
looking at things now one of the most
crude options that you might have at
your disposal is to Simply take another
perspective and literally add a new
dimension so you could add a new
dimension using all kinds of functions
right so right now we've got X1 and X2
you could say something like
X3
equals um it could be something as
simple as uh
X1 X2 just X1 *
X2 so you could do something like that
and boom you've got a third dimension
now the problem happens however when you
are working with let's say feature sets
that are maybe let's let's say you're
doing image analysis or video an Anis
basically the same thing you might have
hundreds of features or thousands of
features even and so looking at the data
we have right here obviously we just
added one more Dimension we went from
two Dimensions to three dimensions not a
horrible thing but actually in reality
that's a 50% increase in in data right
and what was that main downfall of the
support Vector machine oh right it was
training it because if you have a large
size of data it is extremely cumbersome
to train it because of that quadratic
programming and optimization problem
that we have so is it really a great
idea to be multiplying our data set
Maybe by uh
1.5x right uh probably not I mean we
want to avoid doing that because we're
just we're weakening the algorithm on
ourselves so we don't really want to
want to do that if we don't have to now
what if I told you that you could do
calculations in plausibly infinite
Dimensions or maybe even better put what
if I told you that you could have
calculations done for you imp plausibly
infinite Dimensions without ever
actually having to visit those
Dimensions yourself and without having
to pay the processing
costs that would be pretty impressive
right well it turns out that you might
be able to do that and the way that we
Kernels
would do that if we could do that is by
using
kernels so most people I think probably
first come into contact and maybe lastly
including firstly come into contact with
kernels with the support Vector machine
and and may find themselves under the
impression that kernels are really just
used it it's just like something used in
a support Vector machine and that's it
that's not the case a kernel is a
similarity function it takes two inputs
and outputs their similarity simple as
that being that this is a machine
learning tutorial some of you might be
thinking already well why don't people
just use kernels as machine learning
classifiers and I would say that they do
it just so happens that we can actually
use kernels to augment or add to our
support Vector machine hopefully and
allow us to work with nonlinear data by
transforming that nonlinear data to
another dimension and finding a linear
um in creating a linear linearly
separable situation so to speak uh as
hard as it might be to speak such a
thing so keep in mind why this is so
valuable right out of the gate because
in that
previous in that previous page we were
talking about okay well if you have
two-dimensional data is not linearly
separable you could create a function
that could create more dimensions for
you that are based on those previous
features and it would be valid and
statistically sound but you would be
paying a lot more in processing 50% or
even more so consider let's say because
you it's not just the case you add one
dimension it's separable right it's like
what if you have 30 Dimensions already
is it is it likely that if you add one
more Dimension that you're going to get
linear separate uh linearly separable
data probably not you're probably going
to add more like 10 or 15 or maybe even
more right you might actually have to
add a 100 Dimensions before you actually
get linearly separable data or maybe you
have to add a million Dimensions right
this can get out of hand really really
fast so anyways back to Colonels and
back to me what if I told you that you
could do this uh and not pay the price
so with kernels there's really just one
one major element to kernels and that is
that they are done using inner product
and for the purposes of what we're going
to be using them for and the purposes of
this entire tutorial what is inner
product what is dot product how do they
relate they are the same thing if you
pull up numpy right now you make a
couple vectors and you do np. inner or
NP do um dot you're going to find that
the same data gives the exact same
answers when you run that through so
just keep that in mind you're going to
hear especially if you go to another
source or you're coming from another
source some people say dot some people
say iner and it's just the same thing I
I believe fundamentally you should be
using the inner product uh if you're if
you're writing a paper on this I think
you it's inner but I could be totally
wrong you can look that up on your own
Using a Kernel
so the question is can we use a kernel
and if so how do we know that we can use
a
kernel so to find out if we can use a
kernel we know that in order to use a
kernel we have to be able to use inner
product and then and the way that we can
find out is basically we're trying to
get to some sort of new dimensional
space so up to this point we've been
using basically we've got X we're we're
dealing in an X
space okay because we're our feature
sets are are denoted as X1 X2 and so on
are we already have a value for y and
that's the class so so the next most
reasonable variable will be Z for Zs
space so the question is can we
interchange x and z obviously you know
fundamentally we could do that right but
is it is every interaction in our let's
say our optimization algorithm and all
that and for everything for the support
Vector is every interaction with the X
space a DOT product or an inner product
well let's find out so going back let's
let's start at at the end and kind of
work our way backwards so right away
like let's say we've got an unknown
feature set which is uh we we'll call it
X for now right an unknown feature set
is X how did we determine what the
classification was well it was just
simply the classification was going to
be Y and that was just y equals the
S not the S the sign
of and that was just
w.x + B right and really if we're going
to be perfect I I did warn you that I
was not we're probably going to drop
those bars pretty quick but anyway sign
WX plus b what's this well hot diggity
that's a DOT so could we interchange x
with some sort of Z value absolutely
right because again what is what is what
is w.x going to return to us is that
going to return a vector or is that
going to return just a number a scalar
value well it's going to return a scalar
so does it matter if x is uh five
Dimensions or 50
Dimensions I realized I did a lower case
in a capital anyway five Dimensions or
50 Dimensions does it matter no it
doesn't because it's just going to
return a scalar so modifying X you know
our X space to a zspace an unknown
Dimension space is that going to have an
effect on the classification algorithm
that sign
algorithm nope no problem there now how
about the constraints probably where a
lot of people stopped watching the
series right so really in reality there
are two major constraints now we really
just worked with one because we were
able to get away with it uh and and we
didn't do true quadratic programming so
first let's look at that one and then
we'll go and deal with the other the
other constraint that we have to deal
with so the first constraint was the
requirement that y sub I multiplied by x
sub i w + b - 1 was greater than or
equal to
zero right and again that's uh we didn't
have we don't have the dot there but
it's just kind of expected that you you
know that by this point but anyway that
is there's your Dot and since we're
really focusing on the dot I figure I
might as well make it
explicit right and again right can we
interchange xabi with a theoretical Zu
subi yep because that's a DOT product
right we got no problem replacing that
so that's one of the constraints what
about that other constraint well the
other formal constraint was that
basically it wasn't even really a
constraint it's just a value once we
found if you recall the the quadratic
programming problem was basically going
to give us some values for Alpha so that
was going to be the value for eventually
W and that was going to eventually give
us basically the sum over Alpha i y
i x
i okay and again I'll be good and try to
stick my dots in there dot there we go
uh again X subi what's it doing looks
like a DOT to me so yet again we have
confirmation that every interaction is a
DOT product and if we go back to the
really long equation the first one that
we wrote what did we have at the very
end of that well it was L equals
hopefully I can fit it on here uh that
was going to be the sum over Alpha
I
minus
12 the double sum and that was I and
then we said
J Alpha I Alpha J that double Alpha
which was what was scared us away
initially and then y sub i y
subj
dotted with x i
dotted with
XJ again right and that was kind of how
we that was the equation that came
before that W equals but again we find
that we've um we all of the interactions
are a dotproduct right so so we can get
away with having no problem with
kernels so now what we need to do is
actually kind is is talk about what's an
example of a kernel and actually kind of
see with our eyeballs one how the kernel
is going to transform a feature set that
we have and then two actually work out
the math to show you why because so far
I've shown you that okay this is how we
know we can actually use a kernel but I
have yet to really show you how we can
go out to to more Dimensions without
actually paying any price so I've said
plausibly infinite you're not always
going to go out to infinite Dimensions
you might only go out to Six Dimensions
or eight Dimensions or whatever but the
main the main value here is that you can
go out to all those Dimensions without
actually paying the processing cost and
that's the entire reason why we're going
to use kernels rather than some sort of
function that just creates New
Dimensions like what we wrote out before
so that's what we're going to be talking
about in the next tutorial is actually
applying a kernel working out that
kernel by hand and truly showing it
because we can actually do it with one
of the kernels it's a polinomial kernel
we can actually work that one out by
hand and conceptualize how the kernel
works and then as we move on there's
some kernels that we really are not
going to be able to really conceptualize
so we can't really do it but anyways at
least one of them we'll do uh so you can
get the idea and then finally we will
move over to Python and actually show an
example of of Kernel at work so on
sumary a kernel is really not something
that's specific or unique to the support
Vector machine it's just a similarity
function we can restate many of the
machine learning algorithms or even
create our own machine learning
algorithms purely with kernels so a
kernel just takes two inputs and outputs
the similarity of them using the inner
product inner product is a projection of
let's say X1 onto X2 basically how much
overlapping do we have going on there
which is how and why it's considered to
be a degree of
similarity so so we know that we can use
a kernel to help us transform our
feature space our X space because every
interaction with that feature space is
an inner product reaction so anyways if
you have any questions or comments or
whatever up to this point feel free to
leave them below otherwise as always
thanks for watching thanks for all the
support subscriptions and until next
time

What is going on everybody and welcome
to part 30 of our machine learning with
Python tutorial series and another video
for the support vector machine and
really kind of in general kernels uh and
all of that. So what we've been talking
about is how to handle for nonlinearly
separable data. And up to this point
we've been talking about the kernel and
and how we're going to do some sort of
magical thing with a kernel of going
into plausibly an infinite dimension and
doing some calculation there or actually
having a calculation done there for us.
So we don't actually have to visit that
dimension and yet we can get back the
answer somehow. So that all sounds
really handwavy. So I think it's
important that we can actually kind of
work this out and see how that actually
works so that we have a little more
faith in in this whole thing because
it's kind of crazy.
Kernels
So first of all when you're when you're
going to write out a kernel generally
let's say you've got X uh you know we're
going to call our feature set X and then
we're going to call the new dimension or
the new space our zpace. So you're going
to have uh you're going to say usually
something like this. So you're going to
say k of and we're going to say x comma
x prime. Okay. So just for the record
that that like
slashlooking thing is a prime. I'm going
to do my best to keep it a like a really
slanted slash so it's not confused with
an x supposedly to the power of one. But
anyway, so X and X prime and that K is
just your kernel. And that is going to
equal
this new Zspace where you've got Z
dotted with Z prime. Like I said, I did
not want that to be a one. So maybe that
I don't know. Anyway, that's a prime. So
first of all, what is Z? Okay. Right. So
you can kind of think of Z as some sort
of function that's being applied to its
X counterpart. So Z equals let's say a
function
of X and then Z prime
is a also a function
of X-pime. Okay. And when you do a
kernel, let's say a kernel and something
comma something. What are you actually
doing? You're doing a you're you're
you're running first of all, you're
going to convert X to Z, right? The
constituents will be converted, right?
This gets converted to a Z. This is
getting converted to a Z prime. And then
what are you doing? Well, it's the
dotproduct.
the dotproduct or the inner product
between this and this whatever that
happens to be and that's a kernel. As
long as you're doing those two things,
it is a valid kernel. And it's important
to note that function and function
are equal to each other. You have to do
the same thing, right? You you can't
just kind of do one thing to x and then
another thing to x prime. It needs to be
the same. It needs to be symmetrical.
Uh, so keep that in mind as well. Also,
before we move on, I don't know that
I'll ever really show it again, but a
lot of times you might see rather than,
you know, k of x or whatever, you're
going to see the kernel being denoted as
a uh f or fi or however you want to
pronounce that. So you might see it in
an equation like uh y equals
w
5x
+ b. Okay, something like that you're
going to see and that's just going to
denote that hey this person is using a a
kernel and not just the straight up
formal SVM calculation. First of all,
inherently we can see right out of the
gate again what does a dotroduct or an
inner product what does that produce? It
simply produces a scalar value. That is
it right? And so all we need from this
magical zspace
well really it's this one and this one
right all we need from that zspace is
actually
the inner product right and that is the
kernel. So the question is of course can
we calculate the inner product of that
zspace without actually knowing that
zspace and needing to to process that
zspace. So first let's consider a really
simple feature set. It's just going to
be a nice two-dimensional feature set
kind of like what we've been working
with really up until this point. So
let's say your feature set is um and
I'll even let me write that out. FE
I'm not going to write that out because
that's messy. So your feature set you're
going to have X1,
X2.
That is your feature set. Your feature
set is a vector. And then let's say we
want to take ourselves out to some sort
of zspace. And the way we're going to do
it is with a second order polomial. So
we're going to convert this
to a second order
polomial.
So how are we going to do that? Well,
when you do that, you're going to start
with one. Then you're going to just take
the x1 then comma x2, right? So so it's
going to create a new vector for us,
right? And this new vector is going to
come out to be six dimensions, right? So
you're going to start with one uh for
second order. Then it would be just one
x1 x2 and then x1 * itself, x2 * itself,
and then x1 * x2. That's all you do to
just we're going to take it out to that
second order, right? So So let's go
ahead and write that out. It probably
would have been easier the first time
anyway. But so so first of all our our
feature set like let's say let's say
those x's are I don't know little x's
but the big x right that feature set is
equal to x1 x2 and all that then we're
going to say this new zspace is going to
be z equals and again it's just a second
order polomial so we're going to take it
out to u and actually I think we'll go
we'll go to another page. So I'm saying
uh x equals I just wanted to have some
more space here so we could fit
everything hopefully. So x is equal to
uh x1 comma x2
this is a vector and then we're going to
we're taking out to the zpace and we're
going to say actually z and z is just a
second order polomial of x. We've I've
already kind of explained that. Now
we're actually going to write it out. So
that's just going to it's going to start
with the number one comma. Again this is
going to be a vector. It's going to be
comma then just the first two original
values that we had. So that would just
be x1 comma x2
comma then it's going to be the first
value multiplied by itself. So just just
x1 squared. Okay x1
squared then we do the same thing. So x2
squared
comma
and then it's just x1 * x2. So x1
x
2
and again this is our new zspace. So
this is our new zspace where z this new
zspace the the function that we've run
here is second order polomial. Okay. And
and I'd already went through that logic,
but it's just one, you know, the first
value, second value, the third value or
really the fourth value will just be the
square, you know, the first value times
itself, then the second value times
itself, and then finally that sixth
final value is just the first value
times the second value. Okay, second
order polinomial.
So that is our zpace and and remember we
said that K let's we'll write it out. We
said k of x
and x prime. And sometimes you might see
k of x and y or some people might even
write x1 x2. Okay, just don't worry
about the notation. Just understand when
you see k and then two values that's a
kernel. So K, recall K of X and X prime
we said was going to be equal to the
dotproduct of Z and Z prime, right? And
Z and Z prime are going to be identical,
right? Because they're they're going to
be the same this same notated vector at
least. So so what is the dotproduct of Z
and Z prime? Well, what is the
dotproduct? What is the inner product?
Well, it's just each value times itself.
So in theory, we would know we would
know Zp prime basically. I'm just going
to write it out really quick, but Z
prime is equal
to this,
right? It's just rather than X1, it
would be
I suppose I'll I'll write it out. So
that's Z and Z prime. Same thing. It's
just, you know, obviously just throwing
in the prime. And then kx of X prime.
What were the two things we were doing?
We're applying first that function to x
which we've just done to convert it to
z. But then that final thing is it's
just it's the dotproduct of z and zp
prime. So you can really think of it now
as k x
prime equals
z dot z prime. Right? And what does that
equal? Well, recall the dotproduct is
just each con each kind of constituent
of the vector multiplied by that same
place constituent. So what we're going
to have here is, you know, 1 * 1. So
that's just simply one
plus and then it's x
1 * x prime 1.
So x1
* x prime 1 +
x2 x prime 2. So x 2 x prime 2
plus
x1 2 x prime 1 2.
So x1
2ar x prime
Prime prime 1^ 2
plus X
2^ 2ar X prime 2^ 2ar
plus X1
X prime 1 X 2 X prime
Okay, so that looks obviously really
messy. Those primes are pretty hard to
truly denote out here. Uh, but hopefully
if you followed along, you got the whole
primes and stuff like that. If not, uh,
you can check out the textbased version
on pythonprogramming.net and I'll use
something like latex or something like
that to make it very nice and neat. So,
it's totally obvious uh, what's prime
and what's one and all this. But
hopefully you you recognize that you
would never write to the power of of
one. So what we've done here is actually
we have gone to the zpace, right?
Because you and I went to the zpace and
actually performed the calculation
because we actually did the conversion
to the zspace and then performed a
dotproduct of that conversion to get our
answer. Okay. And as you can see that
was actually a really long and very
tedious. uh my hand kind of hurts after
writing down all of those things, right?
And so your processor also kind of hurts
because that's a lot of stuff. So the
next question is uh can we do this
kernel without actually writing it out
uh or without actually having to visit
this Z space? And the answer is yes. And
this is again this is called the
polomial kernel. So the polomial kernel
Polynomials
is the following. So you're going to say
k x comma x prime
and this equals
1 + x dotted with x prime to the power
of p. You can have that power of p be
whatever you want. So, so basically to
write this out in in further notation,
let's say you've got a number of
dimensions and then P is basically
whatever you want it to be. What we just
did a second ago was P equals 2 and for
we'll say however many dimensions uh you
want, but let's say N and N was also
equal to two. But you could in theory
have P equal many more. But first let's
let's write this one out and then we'll
we'll consider the difference of adding
and changing and manipulating P and N
here momentarily.
So first of all do you see any Z in this
in either of these calculations? I
don't. There is no Z. Okay. So what
would happen though if we for example
let's say we wrote out uh let's expand
this first. So this would be basically 1
+ x1
x1 prime and then basically it's plus
dot dot dot
all the way out to x n x primen
to the power of p whatever that happens
to be. Now imagine though how much more
difficult
is this equation if we changed n
to
15 and p
to 100.
Now obviously you know by hand or
something that that would make this
significantly more challenging but by
a let's say a calculator by Python or or
something like that by a processor how
much more difficult is this equation?
Not much more difficult. I mean it's it
might it might cost you an extra cycle
or a few cycles or something but for the
most part that's not that much more
difficult as opposed to here where we're
actually going to the zspace and in this
case that was just a secondorder
polomial this could get way more complex
we're just simply going to like in this
case we've we've gone to the zspace and
and done the dotproduct and found our
answer uh and it's it's pretty ugly
already just looking at it. Whereas over
here, we actually don't have to have to
do that much. And and in reality, if we
were to if we were to work this out, we
would find that we we had the exact same
problem. And then you can even you could
pull this down into their own little
separate the separate vectors and it and
it might give you it would give you a
vector like uh one comma be x1^ 2ar
x 2ar
of 2 by x
square t of x oops
square of 2 x 2
and then the square t of 2 x 2 * x1 x2.
And it's important to know that that
square of two is simply avoiding
it's just a square of two * x1 *
x2. Uh so keep that in mind. So what
would happen when this is a vector and
it was multiplied by itself. What would
you get in return? Like what would that
scalar value be? Right? Well that would
be your second order polomial dotproduct
between uh the two x's having been
transformed to the zspace dotproduct
those two things. you have the exact
same scaler except you went through a
lot less work. So another kernel is
RBF
going to be our RBF or radial basis
function kernel. It's a lot more complex
and you can't really conceptualize it as
easily as we could the polomial kernel.
Regardless the kernel is k
xx prime is equal to the exponential. So
it's an exponential function of the
negative gamma
times the absolute value of x - x prime
squared. Okay. So in theory this can
take you out to infinite dimensions. And
just in case anybody's not familiar x
you know an exponential function like
this. So, e xp
x = e to the x.
So, uh what's happening here is
plausibly you could go out to an
infinite number of dimensions. Now, as
you may guess, that could get you into a
little bit of trouble. Also,
it's infinite dimensions. I struggle to
say fundamentally, but in reality it's
it's really not not really. I guess I
it's hard to explain. Uh you can save
that for your doctoral dissertation if
you'd like. So anyway,
one problem though that you might get by
going out into an infinite number of
dimensions as you might guess is that
maybe just maybe you might wind up maybe
your data shouldn't actually be there.
Maybe there's nothing there in your
data, but if you're willing to go out to
an infinite number of dimensions, it's
likely that at some point you're going
to find some sort of linearly separable
case. And when your data really really
wasn't meant to be linearly separable in
the first place. So in the next
tutorial, what we're going to be talking
about is when you're using a kernel to
kind of force your data into some sort
of linear separability.
when you do that how might you know when
you've made a mistake and then also not
only that what can you do to avoid this
exact same mistake which actually can be
pretty common even with a polomial
kernel but really RBF and just for the
record uh RBF
or radial basis function this is your
default kernel this is the one that
pretty much is going to be used uh
depending on whatever library you use.
But with Scikit Lauren, for example, the
default kernel with a support vector
machine is the radial basis function
simply because it's going to work most
of the time. Fundamentally again and
theoretically, you can actually kind of
you can make data sets that RBF will not
be able to linearly separate. It's it's
possible mathematically to do that, but
in all reality, it is
almost certainly unlikely to ever be the
case that RBF won't be able to separate
your data. So, so anyway, you can you
can get into trouble like that. So, you
want to watch out when using the RBF uh
kernel. So anyways, of course though
after you know just because you've fit a
support vector machine, you know, you've
optimized your support vector machine,
you can also one way one way you can
find out right away uh is what we're
going to be talking about in the next
tutorial. But also once you test it and
you know you might actually have
optimized it, you go to test it and you
have you know 50% accuracy and you're
like what the heck? Uh that's kind
that's probably why uh you ran into some
trouble is what we'll be talking about
in the next tutorial. So anyways, uh,
and what we'll be talking about might
help you remedy this or maybe your data
actually just is not separable. It's not
good data. So anyways, if you have
questions, comments, concerns up to this
point, feel free to leave them below.
Otherwise, as always, thanks for
watching. Thanks for all the support and
subscriptions and until next

what's going on everybody and welcome to
part 35 of our machine learning tutorial
Series where we're talking about
clustering specifically flat clustering
with the K means algorithm so in this
tutorial we're actually going to be
using this Titanic data set I don't
really know if the original true
original origin of the Titanic data set
but you can go to this link here I'll
try to remember to put it in the
description if I forget you can go to
the text based version of this tutorial
and it will be there as well and you can
also remind me and I'll put it in the
description if I do forget hopefully I
won't now um I also I've kept all the
imports from the previous like the
tutorial we just did uh so I kept all
those there and then I went ahead and
added some of this data again I probably
this will be in the text space version I
don't think I'll I might throw it in the
description but I might not um but
anyway uh the Titanic data set as you
might guess contains data from the
passengers on the Titanic which sunk and
all that and was a a very emotional
movie um and so this is the data that is
contained within that uh that data set
and basically this has information on
what was the class of that passenger so
like first class second class third
class okay so like planes right first
class is the is the best uh second class
and third class also first class was
higher on the ship they were closer to
lifeboats and all that third class is at
the bottom of the ship where things
flooded first anyway um so there you
have that then you've got whether or not
this passenger actually survived their
name uh you've got their sex Rong the
butt in there uh you've got their age
their siblings so basically number of
siblings or spouses on board you've got
um the number of parents and
children um and then you've got the
ticket number which I'm not really sure
that's going to have any True Value but
you've got it you've got the fair how
much did that passenger actually pay
which will be very interesting that
we'll see down the line whether or not
how much they paid has any impact we
expect class to have an impact but then
the question of what about their Fair
after their class uh does that have any
impact uh the cabin that they stayed in
uh which obviously is going to matter
you depending on where that cabin was
located but it probably matters more
what what uh what their class was where
they embarked from again that probably
just going to have more to do with how
much they paid for their ticket and what
their class was if they got on a
Lifeboat what Lifeboat they got on to
their body identification number and
then their wherever their home or their
destination was so we have all this
information and our interest is uh
whether or not uh we can find any
insights from this data but then also
going back to our like our Amazon data
analyst example uh we should we're we're
assuming that at least some of this data
is valuable data in determining whether
or not someone would um would survive or
die in the sinking of the Titanic so we
we we have this data set and this is a
popular data set because people assume
that these are valuable traits uh and
information on some people to determine
whether or not they would survive a
sinking of the Titanic uh and so the
question is what if we used K means and
we tell K means hey or any other flat
clustering algorithm but in this case k
means we say hey K means separate these
people into two groups and what are we
going to learn about those two groups
and the first question we can ask is uh
hey did they survive or not and like of
these two groups like what's what's the
survival rate of those two groups or
even even more simply how accurate are
these two groups at deciding survival
and death so can we can is c means going
to figure out is Cam's basically going
to separate these people into groups of
survivors and and ders basically so um
Import Data
that'll be an interesting thing to to
find out so of those Imports uh we are
actually going to bring in uh we're
going to say from
sklearn import
preprocessing and
cross validation we're going to import
pandas as PD and I think that's
everything we're actually going to
use so now we're going to come down and
again if if you don't have this make
sure you get it put it in the directory
you're working in or specify full path
mine's in the same directory as a script
I'm working on so I can just say the
name basically so DF is going to equal
pd. read
Excel is or isn't pandas just lovely I
love pandas anyway titanic. XLS we read
that into a data frame we're done we can
also let's go ahead and just real
quickly we can print out the data frame
head so we can just kind of see some of
this information and one thing I'm going
to point out in what this tutorial is
about to be um covering is well these
are numbers right PE passenger class
number survived as a number name not a
number but do we think the name is going
to have actual like
significance um there's probably some
national language processing that we
could do based on the name in
determining whether or not that name is
prestigious or not but um we'll leave
that alone we're not going to go down
that path next we have sex this is one
that's a really important characteristic
yet it is not um numerical
uh then basically the rest of this stuff
all the way up to cabin again cabin is
probably pretty important uh but it's
obviously not in numerical form then
we've got where they Embark from again
we think that's important but it's not
numerical data and then the destination
may be important we think it it could be
important um and we'd like to leave it
in but again it's not numerical so the
question is immediately what do you do
with this data because the all machine
learning is going to require you to have
numerical data so so what do you do well
I don't know what everyone else does but
I'll show you at least what I do when
doing this sort of thing so that so
generally what you're going to do is
okay let's let's take um let's take the
sex column so you're going to take
you're going to take the sex column and
then what I do is I'm going to create
I'm going to take the list of the sex
column I'm going to take the set of the
sex column which is just going to be
basically the unique values and then
what we're going to do is um so those
are like the set of the sex
column values is going to be female male
right that's going to be the set so we
could do the same thing with like home
desk if we just did this these five rows
if we took the set of the home
destination column we'd actually have
two values we have St Louis and this
Chesterville I don't know was that
Ontario or something I don't I really
don't know anyway um
yeah must be I don't know anyway um so
so that would take the set and then from
there we'll just assign we'll say Okay
female is zero male is one right and
we'll just keep going down the list like
if there's five elements in the set the
first is zero the second is one and so
on that way we assigned a unique ID to
the value in that column now if you have
a lot of values in that column though
you might find that you're getting
outliers right and uh as you've already
seen uh outliers are likely to cause
some trouble so if you have you know a
small number and then you end up doing
pre-processing anyways you'll probably
be fine but just keep that in mind but
this is how I'm going to handle uh this
column honestly I've never really looked
into like how people translate um text
Data into numerical data but I'm sure
people do something similar so first
Add Missing Data
what we're going to do is let's go ahead
and and uh we also had a lot of missing
data in there so we're going to fill
that in as well U there's kind of two
options we have here and we'll have to
see down the line which one matters but
I'm probably I'm more inclined to
actually not I'm getting ahead of myself
it's like I'm thinking I've already made
my decision I'm already disagreeing with
myself and you're probably like what the
hell is this dude talking about so first
we're going to say DF do drop and we're
going to go ahead and drop a couple
columns we're going to drop uh we're
going to drop that body and then we're
going to drop
the name column cuz we we uh I'm
thinking you know the body
identification number if there's even a
number there it's gonna I'm I'm assuming
the body identification number is for
dead people I I don't know actually pull
this up really quick um oh we're not
printing head anymore anyway what was
the error
here oh it says it's not contained uh
one in place equals true and then let me
printf. head
so body n and and and and survived zero
huh so maybe at least the survival that
we have don't have body identification
numbers and then probably some people
don't have body identification numbers
because their body was never found I'm
just totally making this up on the Fly
though so I'm not really confident that
that's true but I'm thinking that that's
the case so if they even have a body
identification number they probably died
and so our purpose here is to see if
this data is descriptive of survivors
and ders or not so I don't want to have
that there because I feel like that
would taint uh the whole thing so we're
going to drop that we're also going to
run a DF Doon convert
objects uh convert to numeric equals
true and then we're going to do a DF
fillna we're going to fill with zero in
place equals true I'm going to go ahead
and wager that pandas is going to yell
at me for this convert objects pretty
sure they changed
that
yeah pd. 2 numeric unfortunately that
wants us to use like a series at a time
I don't really want to do that I want to
be able to convert the entire data frame
if you know how what the real
replacement to this because like this
basically when we say this we are
converting all of the columns to numeric
but if you try to use pd. convert
numeric or something like that I think
yeah pd. 2 numeric if you use that on
the entire data frame you get a problem
so I'm not really sure what the the true
correct way around that is uh and it
might not even be an issue in this data
set but I'm going to throw it in there
for now anyway but if you get an error
feel free to comment that out because
probably in the coming months that will
be totally deprecated and removed Okay
Handle NonNumeric Data
so we've got the the data and basically
at this point we still have that like
non-numerical data so we're actually
going to handle for that now so we're
going to say handle non
numerical data for the data frame
obviously just going to pass the data
frame here and then we're going to say
the columns here are DF do columns.
values okay so these are just the every
column and then we're going to say four
column in colums what do we want to do
well we're going to say the text digit
vals
equals and we're just going to say um an
empty an empty dictionary for now then
we're going to have a quick function
here that's just going to be convert to
int vow and then it's going to say
return the text digit vows of the index
that is that value so what's going to
happen here is like I was saying you
know let's say for female will be index
zero so this dictionary will be like
zero colon uh or actually I'm sorry it
most like it'll be more likely this
it'll be female colon zero right and
then mail and so on so then converting
to an in it's going to say okay we're
going to reference text digit vales what
female what's the value zero okay simple
as that that's how it's going to do the
conversion so now what we're going to do
is uh we're going to say if the DF
column
column. dtype
um is not equal to mp.
int int64 and the DF uh column. dtype
does not equal np. float 64 if neither
of those are the case then what we're
going to say is the column underscore
contents is
DF
column. values. two list and then we're
going to say the unique elements here
unique undor elements equals set column
contents so it's just we're just
grabbing like I was saying before that's
just going to give us all all the unique
non-repetitive uh values there then
we're just going to iterate through
we're going to say xals 0 and we're
going to say for Unique in unique
unique
elements if that unique is not in text
digit vows we're going to say text digit
vowels
unique equals X and then we're just
going to say X oops X+ =
1 and then we come over and then we're
going to map once basically at this
point we've we've we're we're going
through each column right I'm pointing
on the screen like you can see that
we're going through each column uh We've
Define this little stupid function and
we've emptied out the dictionary and
then we are uh basically asking if that
column is a number or not if it's not uh
then we're going to convert to list get
the set of that list we're going to take
the unique elements populate that
dictionary and then still within that if
statement right because we don't want to
do this if if it's not within this if
statement that it's not a number we're
going to say
DF um and let me make some space DF
column whatever that column is is going
to be equal to the list map and then
we're going to convert to int and then
we're going to apply that basically to
the values within the DF column so we're
basically resetting the values of DF
column by mapping this function here to
um to the value that is in that column
and if you want to know more about
mapping functions uh you should check
out the pandas tutorial and the data
analysis section on
pythonprogramming.net
so uh we've done that and then finally
at the end of this function we simply
return DF
oops I need more sleep or coffee or both
return DF now DF is now going to equal
handle nonnumerical
data DF and then what we're going to say
is print uh
dfad what a
doozy okay so we're done we're still
getting this stupid little error if you
know the solution to that feel free to
comment below
because although actually this is just a
warning convert objects is deprecated
interesting anyway so if you know the
solution to that uh feel free to post
below and help others out hopefully
whenever this hits the fan and no longer
works so anyway coming down here as we
can see sex one Z everything is
converted to numbers beautiful beautiful
okay so uh that's how you can handle
non-numerical data there's probably
better ways to do it so for example here
um you know converting the column you
know
making it a list converting to a set
really I mean this is not the most
inefficient code in the world uh but
again if your set was very large
obviously you wouldn't want to apply
this to like a text document most
likely um although I don't know any
better way really to assign values to to
words for example I usually use this for
text documents too but anyway there's
probably a much more efficient method I
just don't simply know it anyway uh
that's that now what we're going to do
in the next tutorial is actually apply
clustering now flat clustering and see
the groups that it creates and then see
if those two groups are indeed survivors
and nons survivors so if you have any
questions comments concerns whatever up
to this point feel free to leave them
below otherwise as always thanks for
watching thanks for all the support and
subscriptions and until next time