Categorical data has a specific set of possible values. For example:

The different species of animals in a national park
The names of streets in a particular city
Whether or not an email is spam
The colors that house exteriors are painted
Binned numbers, which are described in the Working with Numerical Data module
Numbers can also be categorical data
True numerical data can be meaningfully multiplied. For example, consider a model that predicts the value of a house based on its area. Note that a useful model for evaluating house prices typically relies on hundreds of features. That said, all else being equal, a house of 200 square meters should be roughly twice as valuable as an identical house of 100 square meters.

Oftentimes, you should represent features that contain integer values as categorical data instead of numerical data. For example, consider a postal code feature in which the values are integers. If you represent this feature numerically rather than categorically, you're asking the model to find a numeric relationship between different postal codes. That is, you're telling the model to treat postal code 20004 as twice (or half) as large a signal as postal code 10002. Representing postal codes as categorical data lets the model weight each individual postal code separately.

Encoding
Encoding means converting categorical or other data to numerical vectors that a model can train on. This conversion is necessary because models can only train on floating-point values; models can't train on strings such as "dog" or "maple". This module explains different encoding methods for categorical data.

The term dimension is a synonym for the number of elements in a feature vector. Some categorical features are low dimensional. For example:

Feature name	# of categories	Sample categories
snowed_today	2	True, False
skill_level	3	Beginner, Practitioner, Expert
season	4	Winter, Spring, Summer, Autumn
day_of_week	7	Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday
planet	8	Mercury, Venus, Earth
When a categorical feature has a low number of possible categories, you can encode it as a vocabulary. With a vocabulary encoding, the model treats each possible categorical value as a separate feature. During training, the model learns different weights for each category.

For example, suppose you are creating a model to predict a car's price based, in part, on a categorical feature named car_color. Perhaps red cars are worth more than green cars. Since manufacturers offer a limited number of exterior colors, car_color is a low-dimensional categorical feature. The following illustration suggests a vocabulary (possible values) for car_color:

Figure 1. Each color in the palette is represented as a separate
      feature. That is, each color is a separate feature in the feature vector.
      For instance, 'Red' is a feature, 'Orange' is a separate feature,
      and so on.
Figure 1. A unique feature for each category.
Index numbers
Machine learning models can only manipulate floating-point numbers. Therefore, you must convert each string to a unique index number, as in the following illustration:

Figure 2. Each color is associated with a unique integer value. For
      example, 'Red' is associated with the integer 0, 'Orange' with the
      integer 1, and so on.
Figure 2. Indexed features.
After converting strings to unique index numbers, you'll need to process the data further to represent it in ways that help the model learn meaningful relationships between the values. If the categorical feature data is left as indexed integers and loaded into a model, the model would treat the indexed values as continuous floating-point numbers. The model would then consider "purple" six times more likely than "orange."

One-hot encoding
The next step in building a vocabulary is to convert each index number to its one-hot encoding. In a one-hot encoding:

Each category is represented by a vector (array) of N elements, where N is the number of categories. For example, if car_color has eight possible categories, then the one-hot vector representing will have eight elements.
Exactly one of the elements in a one-hot vector has the value 1.0; all the remaining elements have the value 0.0.
For example, the following table shows the one-hot encoding for each color in car_color:

Feature	Red	Orange	Blue	Yellow	Green	Black	Purple	Brown
"Red"	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"Orange"	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0
"Blue"	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0
"Yellow"	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"Green"	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"Black"	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"Purple"	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0
"Brown"	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
It is the one-hot vector, not the string or the index number, that gets passed to the feature vector. The model learns a separate weight for each element of the feature vector.

Note: In a true one-hot encoding, only one element has the value 1.0. In a variant known as multi-hot encoding, multiple values can be 1.0.
The following illustration suggests the various transformations in the vocabulary representation:

Figure 3. Diagram of the end-to-end process to map categories to
      feature vectors. In the diagram, the input features are 'Yellow',
      'Orange', 'Blue', and 'Blue' a second time.  The system uses a stored
      vocabulary ('Red' is 0, 'Orange' is 1, 'Blue' is 2, 'Yellow' is 3, and
      so on) to map the input value to an ID. Thus, the system maps 'Yellow',
      'Orange', 'Blue', and 'Blue' to 3, 1, 2, 2. The system then converts
      those values to a one-hot feature vector. For example, given a system
      with eight possible colors, 3 becomes 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0.
Figure 3. The end-to-end process to map categories to feature vectors.
Sparse representation
A feature whose values are predominantly zero (or empty) is termed a sparse feature. Many categorical features, such as car_color, tend to be sparse features. Sparse representation means storing the position of the 1.0 in a sparse vector. For example, the one-hot vector for "Blue" is:

[0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]

Since the 1 is in position 2 (when starting the count at 0), the sparse representation for the preceding one-hot vector is:

2

Notice that the sparse representation consumes far less memory than the eight-element one-hot vector. Importantly, the model must train on the one-hot vector, not the sparse representation.

Note: The sparse representation of a multi-hot encoding stores the positions of all the nonzero elements. For example, the sparse representation of a car that is both "Blue" and "Black" is 2, 5.
Outliers in categorical data
Like numerical data, categorical data also contains outliers. Suppose car_color contains not only the popular colors, but also some rarely used outlier colors, such as "Mauve" or "Avocado". Rather than giving each of these outlier colors a separate category, you can lump them into a single "catch-all" category called out-of-vocabulary (OOV). In other words, all the outlier colors are binned into a single outlier bucket. The system learns a single weight for that outlier bucket.

Encoding high-dimensional categorical features
Some categorical features have a high number of dimensions, such as those in the following table:

Feature name	# of categories	Sample categories
words_in_english	~500,000	"happy", "walking"
US_postal_codes	~42,000	"02114", "90301"
last_names_in_Germany	~850,000	"Schmidt", "Schneider"
When the number of categories is high, one-hot encoding is usually a bad choice. Embeddings, detailed in a separate Embeddings module, are usually a much better choice. Embeddings substantially reduce the number of dimensions, which benefits models in two important ways:

The model typically trains faster.
The built model typically infers predictions more quickly. That is, the model has lower latency.
Hashing (also called the hashing trick) is a less common way to reduce the number of dimensions.

Numerical data is often recorded by scientific instruments or automated measurements. Categorical data, on the other hand, is often categorized by human beings or by machine learning (ML) models. Who decides on categories and labels, and how they make those decisions, affects the reliability and usefulness of that data.

Human raters
Data manually labeled by human beings is often referred to as gold labels, and is considered more desirable than machine-labeled data for training models, due to relatively better data quality.

This doesn't necessarily mean that any set of human-labeled data is of high quality. Human errors, bias, and malice can be introduced at the point of data collection or during data cleaning and processing. Check for them before training.

Any two human beings may label the same example differently. The difference between human raters' decisions is called inter-rater agreement. You can get a sense of the variance in raters' opinions by using multiple raters per example and measuring inter-rater agreement.

 Click to learn about inter-rater agreement metrics

Machine raters
Machine-labeled data, where categories are automatically determined by one or more classification models, is often referred to as silver labels. Machine-labeled data can vary widely in quality. Check it not only for accuracy and biases but also for violations of common sense, reality, and intention. For example, if a computer-vision model mislabels a photo of a chihuahua as a muffin, or a photo of a muffin as a chihuahua, models trained on that labeled data will be of lower quality.

Similarly, a sentiment analyzer that scores neutral words as -0.25, when 0.0 is the neutral value, might be scoring all words with an additional negative bias that is not actually present in the data. An oversensitive toxicity detector may falsely flag many neutral statements as toxic. Try to get a sense of the quality and biases of machine labels and annotations in your data before training on it.

High dimensionality
Categorical data tends to produce high-dimensional feature vectors; that is, feature vectors having a large number of elements. High dimensionality increases training costs and makes training more difficult. For these reasons, ML experts often seek ways to reduce the number of dimensions prior to training.

For natural-language data, the main method of reducing dimensionality is to convert feature vectors to embedding vectors. This is discussed in the Embeddings module later in this course.

Feature crosses are created by crossing (taking the Cartesian product of) two or more categorical or bucketed features of the dataset. Like polynomial transforms, feature crosses allow linear models to handle nonlinearities. Feature crosses also encode interactions between features.

For example, consider a leaf dataset with the categorical features:

edges, containing values smooth, toothed, and lobed
arrangement, containing values opposite and alternate
Assume the order above is the order of the feature columns in a one-hot representation, so that a leaf with smooth edges and opposite arrangement is represented as {(1, 0, 0), (1, 0)}.

The feature cross, or Cartesian product, of these two features would be:

{Smooth_Opposite, Smooth_Alternate, Toothed_Opposite, Toothed_Alternate, Lobed_Opposite, Lobed_Alternate}

where the value of each term is the product of the base feature values, such that:

Smooth_Opposite = edges[0] * arrangement[0]
Smooth_Alternate = edges[0] * arrangement[1]
Toothed_Opposite = edges[1] * arrangement[0]
Toothed_Alternate = edges[1] * arrangement[1]
Lobed_Opposite = edges[2] * arrangement[0]
Lobed_Alternate = edges[2] * arrangement[1]
For example, if a leaf has a lobed edge and an alternate arrangement, the feature-cross vector will have a value of 1 for Lobed_Alternate, and a value of 0 for all other terms:

{0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1}

This dataset could be used to classify leaves by tree species, since these characteristics do not vary within a species.

Click here to compare polynomial transforms with feature crosses

When to use feature crosses
Domain knowledge can suggest a useful combination of features to cross. Without that domain knowledge, it can be difficult to determine effective feature crosses or polynomial transforms by hand. It's often possible, if computationally expensive, to use neural networks to automatically find and apply useful feature combinations during training.

Be careful—crossing two sparse features produces an even sparser new feature than the two original features. For example, if feature A is a 100-element sparse feature and feature B is a 200-element sparse feature, a feature cross of A and B yields a 20,000-element sparse feature.

Playground is an interactive application that lets you manipulate various aspects of training and testing a machine learning model. With Playground, you can select features and adjust hyperparameters, and then discover how your choices influence a model.

This page contains two exercises using the embedded Playground widgets below the instructions.

Exercise 1: A basic feature cross
For this exercise, focus on the following parts of the Playground user interface:

Underneath FEATURES, notice the three potential model features:
x1
x2
x1x2
Underneath OUTPUT, you'll see a square containing orange and blue dots. Imagine that you're looking at a square forest, where orange dots mark the position of sick trees and blue dots mark the position of healthy trees.
Between FEATURES and OUTPUT, if you look very closely, you'll see three faint dashed lines connecting each feature to the output. The width of each dashed line symbolizes the weight currently associated with each feature. These lines are very faint because the starting weight for each feature is initialized to 0. As the weight grows or shrinks, so will the thickness of these lines.
Task 1: Explore Playground by doing the following:

Click on the faint line that connects feature x1 to the output. A popup appears.
In the popup, enter the weight 1.0.
Press Enter.
Notice the following:

The dashed line for x1 becomes thicker as the weight increases from 0 to 1.0.
An orange and blue background now appears.
The orange background is the model's guesses as to where the sick trees are.
The blue background is the model's guesses as to where the healthy trees are. The model is doing a terrible job; about half of the model's guesses are wrong.
Because the weight is 1.0 for x1 and 0 for the other features, the model matches x1's values exactly.
Task 2: Change the weights of any or all of the three features so that the model (the background colors) successfully predicts sick and healthy trees. The solution appears just below Playground.



Click here for the solution to Task 2

Exercise 2: A more sophisticated feature cross
For the second exercise, look at the arrangement of orange dots (sick trees) and blue dots (healthy trees) in the output model, noticing the following:

The dots form roughly spherical patterns.
The arrangement of dots is noisy; for example, notice the occasional blue dots in the outer sphere of orange dots. Consequently, even a great model is unlikely to correctly predict each dot.
Task 1: Explore the Playground UI by doing the following:

Click the Run/Pause button, which is a white triangle inside a black circle. Playground will begin training the model; observe the Epochs counter increasing.
After the system has trained for at least 300 epochs, press that same Run/Pause button to pause the training.
Look at the model. Is the model making good predictions? In other words, are the blue dots generally surrounded by a blue background, and are the orange dots generally surrounded by an orange background?
Examine the value of Test loss, which appears just below OUTPUT. Is this value closer to 1.0 (higher loss) or closer to 0 (lower loss)?
Reset Playground by pressing the curvy arrow to the left of the Run/Pause button.
Task 2: Build a better model by doing the following:

Select or deselect any combination of the five possible features.
Adjust the learning rate.
Train the system for at least 500 epochs.
Examine the value of Test loss. Can you get a Test loss less than 0.2?
Solutions appear below Playground.

