So far, this course has focused on building machine learning (ML) models. However, as Figure 1 suggests, real-world production ML systems are large ecosystems and the model is just a single, relatively small part.

Figure 1. ML system diagram containing the following components:
            data collection, feature extraction, process management tools,
            data verification, configuration, machine resource management,
            monitoring, serving infrastructure, and ML model code. The ML
            model code part of the diagram is dwarfed by the other nine
            components.
Figure 1. A real-world production ML system comprises many components.
 

At the heart of a real-world machine learning production system is the ML model code, but it often represents only 5% or less of the total codebase in the system. That's not a misprint; it's significantly less than you might expect. Notice that an ML production system devotes considerable resources to the input data: collecting it, verifying it, and extracting features from it.

Broadly speaking, you can train a model in either of two ways:

Static training (also called offline training) means that you train a model only once. You then serve that same trained model for a while.
Dynamic training (also called online training) means that you train a model continuously or at least frequently. You usually serve the most recently trained model.
Figure 2. Raw dough creates three identical loaves of bread.
Figure 2. Static training. Train once; serve the same built model multiple times. (Images by Pexels and by fancycrave1.)
 

Figure 3. Raw dough creates slightly different loaves of bread
            each time.
Figure 3. Dynamic training. Retrain frequently; serve the most recently built model. (Images by Pexels and by Couleur.)
 

Table 1. Primary advantages and disadvantages.

Static training	Dynamic training
Advantages	Simpler. You only need to develop and test the model once.	More adaptable. Your model will keep up with any changes to the relationship between features and labels.
Disadvantages	Sometimes staler. If the relationship between features and labels changes over time, your model's predictions will degrade.	More work. You must build, test, and release a new product all the time.
If your dataset truly isn't changing over time, choose static training because it is cheaper to create and maintain than dynamic training. However, datasets tend to change over time, even those with features that you think are as constant as, say, sea level. The takeaway: even with static training, you must still monitor your input data for change.

For example, consider a model trained to predict the probability that users will buy flowers. Because of time pressure, the model is trained only once using a dataset of flower buying behavior during July and August. The model works fine for several months but then makes terrible predictions around Valentine's Day because user behavior during that floral holiday period changes dramatically.

For a more detailed exploration of static and dynamic training, see the Managing ML Projects course.

Inference is the process of making predictions by applying a trained model to unlabeled examples. Broadly speaking, a model can infer predictions in one of two ways:

Static inference (also called offline inference or batch inference) means the model makes predictions on a bunch of common unlabeled examples and then caches those predictions somewhere.
Dynamic inference (also called online inference or real-time inference) means that the model only makes predictions on demand, for example, when a client requests a prediction.
To use an extreme example, imagine a very complex model that takes one hour to infer a prediction. This would probably be an excellent situation for static inference:

Figure 4. In static inference, a model generates predictions,
            which are then cached on a server.
Figure 4. In static inference, a model generates predictions, which are then cached on a server.
 

Suppose this same complex model mistakenly uses dynamic inference instead of static inference. If many clients request predictions around the same time, most of them won't receive that prediction for hours or days.

Now consider a model that infers quickly, perhaps in 2 milliseconds using a relative minimum of computational resources. In this situation, clients can receive predictions quickly and efficiently through dynamic inference, as suggested in Figure 5.

Figure 5. In dynamic inference, a model infers predictions on
            demand.
Figure 5. In dynamic inference, a model infers predictions on demand.
 

Static inference
Static inference offers certain advantages and disadvantages.

Advantages

Don't need to worry much about cost of inference.
Can do post-verification of predictions before pushing.
Disadvantages

Can only serve cached predictions, so the system might not be able to serve predictions for uncommon input examples.
Update latency is likely measured in hours or days.
Dynamic inference
Dynamic inference offers certain advantages and disadvantages.

Advantages

Can infer a prediction on any new item as it comes in, which is great for long tail (less common) predictions.
Disadvantages

Compute intensive and latency sensitive. This combination may limit model complexity; that is, you might have to build a simpler model that can infer predictions more quickly than a complex model could.
Monitoring needs are more intensive.

Raw data must be feature engineered (transformed). When should you transform data? Broadly speaking, you can perform feature engineering during either of the following two periods:

Before training the model.
While training the model.
Transforming data before training
In this approach, you follow two steps:

Write code or use specialized tools to transform the raw data.
Store the transformed data somewhere that the model can ingest, such as on disk.
Advantages

The system transforms raw data only once.
The system can analyze the entire dataset to determine the best transformation strategy.
Disadvantages

You must recreate the transformations at prediction time. Beware of training-serving skew!
Training-serving skew is more dangerous when your system performs dynamic (online) inference. On a system that uses dynamic inference, the software that transforms the raw dataset usually differs from the software that serves predictions, which can cause training-serving skew. In contrast, systems that use static (offline) inference can sometimes use the same software.

Transforming data while training
In this approach, the transformation is part of the model code. The model ingests raw data and transforms it.

Advantages

You can still use the same raw data files if you change the transformations.
You're ensured the same transformations at training and prediction time.
Disadvantages

Complicated transforms can increase model latency.
Transformations occur for each and every batch.
Transforming the data per batch can be tricky. For example, suppose you want to use Z-score normalization to transform raw numerical data. Z-score normalization requires the mean and standard deviation of the feature. However, transformations per batch mean you'll only have access to one batch of data, not the full dataset. So, if the batches are highly variant, a Z-score of, say, -2.5 in one batch won't have the same meaning as -2.5 in another batch. As a workaround, your system can precompute the mean and standard deviation across the entire dataset and then use them as constants in the model.

You're ready to deploy the unicorn model that predicts unicorn appearances! When deploying, your machine learning (ML) pipeline should run, update, and serve without a problem. If only deploying a model were as easy as pressing a big Deploy button. Unfortunately, a full machine learning system requires tests for:

Validating input data.
Validating feature engineering.
Validating the quality of new model versions.
Validating serving infrastructure.
Testing integration between pipeline components.
Many software engineers favor test-driven development (TDD). In TDD, software engineers write tests prior to writing the "real" source code. However, TDD can be tricky in machine learning. For example, before training your model, you can't write a test to validate the loss. Instead, you must first discover the achievable loss during model development and then test new model versions against the achievable loss.


About the unicorn model
This section refers to the unicorn model. Here's what you need to know:

You are using machine learning to build a classification model that predicts unicorn appearances. Your dataset details 10,000 unicorn appearances and 10,000 unicorn non-appearances. The dataset contains the location, time of day, elevation, temperature, humidity, tree cover, presence of a rainbow, and several other features.

Test model updates with reproducible training
Perhaps you want to continue improving your unicorn model. For example, suppose you do some additional feature engineering on a certain feature and then retrain the model, hoping to get better (or at least the same) results. Unfortunately, it is sometimes difficult to reproduce model training. To improve reproducibility, follow these recommendations:

Deterministically seed the random number generator. For details, see randomization in data generation

Initialize model components in a fixed order to ensure the components get the same random number from the random number generator on every run. ML libraries typically handle this requirement automatically.

Take the average of several runs of the model.

Use version control, even for preliminary iterations, so that you can pinpoint code and parameters when investigating your model or pipeline.

Even after following these guidelines, other sources of nondeterminism might still exist.

Test calls to machine learning API
How do you test updates to API calls? You could retrain your model, but that's time intensive. Instead, write a unit test to generate random input data and run a single step of gradient descent. If this step completes without errors, then any updates to the API probably haven't ruined your model.

Write integration tests for pipeline components
In an ML pipeline, changes in one component can cause errors in other components. Check that components work together by writing an integration test that runs the entire pipeline end-to-end.

Besides running integration tests continuously, you should run integration tests when pushing new models and new software versions. The slowness of running the entire pipeline makes continuous integration testing harder. To run integration tests faster, train on a subset of the data or with a simpler model. The details depend on your model and data. To get continuous coverage, you'd adjust your faster tests so that they run with every new version of model or software. Meanwhile, your slow tests would run continuously in the background.

Validate model quality before serving
Before pushing a new model version to production, test for the following two types of quality degradations:

Sudden degradation. A bug in the new version could cause significantly lower quality. Validate new versions by checking their quality against the previous version.

Slow degradation. Your test for sudden degradation might not detect a slow degradation in model quality over multiple versions. Instead, ensure your model's predictions on a validation dataset meet a fixed threshold. If your validation dataset deviates from live data, then update your validation dataset and ensure your model still meets the same quality threshold.

Validate model-infrastructure compatibility before serving
If your model is updated faster than your server, then your model could have different software dependencies from your server, potentially causing incompatibilities. Ensure that the operations used by the model are present in the server by staging the model in a sandboxed version of the server.

Congratulations! You've deployed the unicorn model. Your model should run 24x7 without any problems. To ensure that it does, you must monitor your machine learning (ML) pipeline.

Write a data schema to validate raw data
To monitor your data, you should continuously check it against expected statistical values by writing rules that the data must satisfy. This collection of rules is called a data schema. Define a data schema by following these steps:

Understand the range and distribution of your features. For categorical features, understand the set of possible values.

Encode your understanding into the data schema. The following are examples of rules:

Ensure that user-submitted ratings are always in the range 1 to 5.
Check that the word the occurs most frequently (for an English text feature).
Check that each categorical feature is set to a value from a fixed set of possible values.
Test your data against the data schema. Your schema should catch data errors such as:

Anomalies
Unexpected values of categorical variables
Unexpected data distributions
Write unit tests to validate feature engineering
While your raw data might pass the data schema, your model doesn't train on raw data. Rather, your model trains on data that has been feature engineered. For example, your model trains on normalized numerical features rather than raw numerical data. Because feature engineered data can be very different from raw input data, you must check feature engineered data separately from your checks on raw input data.

Write unit tests based on your understanding of feature engineered data. For example, you can write unit tests to check for conditions such as the following:

All numeric features are scaled, for example, between 0 and 1.
One-hot encoded vectors only contain a single 1 and N-1 zeroes.
Data distributions after transformation conform to expectations. For example, if you've normalized using Z-scores, the mean of the Z-scores should be 0.
Outliers are handled, such as by scaling or clipping.
Check metrics for important data slices
A successful whole sometimes obscures an unsuccessful subset. In other words, a model with great overall metrics might still make terrible predictions for certain situations. For example:

Your unicorn model performs well overall, but performs poorly when making predictions for the Sahara desert.

If you are the kind of engineer satisfied with an overall great AUC, then you might not notice the model's issues in the Sahara desert. If making good predictions for every region is important, then you need to track performance for every region. Subsets of data, like the one corresponding to the Sahara desert, are called data slices.

Identify data slices of interest. Then compare model metrics for these data slices against the metrics for your entire dataset. Checking that your model performs well across all data slices helps remove bias. See Fairness: Evaluating for Bias for more information.

Use real-world metrics
Model metrics don't necessarily measure the real-world impact of your model. For example, changing a hyperparameter might increase a model's AUC, but how did the change affect user experience? To measure real-world impact, you need to define separate metrics. For example, you could survey users of your model to confirm that they really did see a unicorn when the model predicted they would.

Check for training-serving skew
Training-serving skew means your input data during training differs from your input data in serving. The following table describes the two important types of skew:

Type	Definition	Example	Solution
Schema skew	Training and serving input data do not conform to the same schema.	The format or distribution of the serving data changes while your model continues to train on old data.	Use the same schema to validate training and serving data. Ensure you separately check for statistics not checked by your schema, such as the fraction of missing values
Feature skew	Engineered data differs between training and serving.	Feature engineering code differs between training and serving, producing different engineered data.	Similar to schema skew, apply the same statistical rules across training and serving engineered data. Track the number of detected skewed features, and the ratio of skewed examples per feature.
Causes of training-serving skew can be subtle. Always consider what data is available to your model at prediction time. During training, use only the features that you'll have available when serving.

The Golden Rule: Ensure that training and production mimic each other as closely as possible. The more closely your training task matches your prediction task, the better your ML system will perform.
Exercise: Check your understanding
Suppose you have an online store and want to predict how much money you’ll make on a given day. Your ML goal is to predict daily revenue using the number of customers as a feature.

What problem might you encounter?
Click here to see the answer
Check for label leakage
Label leakage means that your ground truth labels that you're trying to predict have inadvertently entered your training features. Label leakage is sometimes very difficult to detect.

Exercise: Check your understanding
Suppose you build a binary classification model to predict whether or not a new hospital patient has cancer. Your model uses features like the following:

Patient age
Patient gender
Prior medical conditions
Hospital name
Vital signs
Test results
Heredity
The label is as follows:

Boolean: Does the patient have cancer?
You partition the data carefully, ensuring that your training set is well isolated from your validation set and test set. The model performs exceedingly well on the validation set and test set; the metrics are fantastic. Unfortunately, the model performs terribly on new patients in the real world.

Why did this model that excelled on the test set fail miserably in the real world?
Click here to see the answer
Note: This exercise is loosely based on "Leakage in data mining: formulation, detection, and avoidance" by Kaufman, Rosset, and Perlich, with some modifications made along the way.
Monitor model age throughout pipeline
If the serving data evolves with time but your model isn’t retrained regularly, then you will see a decline in model quality. Track the time since the model was retrained on new data and set a threshold age for alerts. Besides monitoring the model's age at serving, you should monitor the model's age throughout the pipeline to catch pipeline stalls.

Test that model weights and outputs are numerically stable
During model training, your weights and layer outputs should not be NaN (not a number) or Inf (infinite). Write tests to check for NaN and Inf values of your weights and layer outputs. Additionally, test that more than half of the outputs of a layer are not zero.

Monitor model performance
Your unicorn appearance predictor has been more popular than expected! You’re getting lots of prediction requests and even more training data. You think that's great until you realize that your model is taking more and more memory and time to train. You decide to monitor your model's performance by following these steps:

Track model performance by versions of code, model, and data. Such tracking lets you pinpoint the exact cause for any performance degradation.
Test the training steps per second for a new model version against the previous version and against a fixed threshold.
Catch memory leaks by setting a threshold for memory use.
Monitor API response times and track their percentiles. While API response times might be outside your control, slow responses could potentially cause poor real-world metrics.
Monitor the number of queries answered per second.
Test the quality of live model on served data
You’ve validated your model. But what if real-world scenarios, such as unicorn behavior, change after recording your validation data? Then the quality of your served model will degrade. However, testing quality in serving is hard because real-world data is not always labeled. If your serving data is not labeled, consider these tests:

Generate labels using human raters.

Investigate models that show significant statistical bias in predictions. See Classification: Prediction Bias.

Track real-world metrics for your model. For example, if you’re classifying spam, compare your predictions to user-reported spam.

Mitigate potential divergence between training and serving data by serving a new model version on a fraction of your queries. As you validate your new serving model, gradually switch all queries to the new version.

Using these tests, remember to monitor both sudden and slow degradation in prediction quality.

Randomization
Make your data generation pipeline reproducible. Say you want to add a feature to see how it affects model quality. For a fair experiment, your datasets should be identical except for this new feature. In that spirit, make sure any randomization in data generation can be made deterministic:

Seed your random number generators (RNGs). Seeding ensures that the RNG outputs the same values in the same order each time you run it, recreating your dataset.
Use invariant hash keys. Hashing is a common way to split or sample data. You can hash each example, and use the resulting integer to decide in which split to place the example. The inputs to your hash function shouldn't change each time you run the data generation program. Don't use the current time or a random number in your hash, for example, if you want to recreate your hashes on demand.
The preceding approaches apply both to sampling and splitting your data.

Considerations for hashing
Imagine again you were collecting Search queries and using hashing to include or exclude queries. If the hash key only used the query, then across multiple days of data, you'll either always include that query or always exclude it. Always including or always excluding a query is bad because:

Your training set will see a less diverse set of queries.
Your evaluation sets will be artificially hard, because they won't overlap with your training data. In reality, at serving time, you'll have seen some of the live traffic in your training data, so your evaluation should reflect that.
Instead you can hash on query + query date, which would result in a different hashing for each day.

Figure 7. Animated visualization showing how hashing solely on the
            query causes data to go into the same bucket each day, but hashing
            on the query plus the query time causes data to go into different
            buckets each day. The three buckets are Training, Evaluation, and
            Ignored.
Figure 7. Hashing on query versus hashing on query + query date.
Note: Because these hash keys use the date that the query was logged (rather than the current date), hashing is deterministic. That is, the hash for "Day One" will be the same regardless of when it is generated.

Is each feature helpful?
You should continuously monitor your model to remove features that contribute little or nothing to the model's predictive ability. If the input data for that feature abruptly changes, your model's behavior might also abruptly change in undesirable ways.

Also consider the following related question:

Does the usefulness of the feature justify the cost of including it?
It is always tempting to add more features to the model. For example, suppose you find a new feature whose addition makes your model's predictions slightly better. Slightly better predictions certainly seem better than slightly worse predictions; however, the extra feature adds to your maintenance burden.

Is your data source reliable?
Some questions to ask about the reliability of your input data:

Is the signal always going to be available or is it coming from an unreliable source? For example:
Is the signal coming from a server that crashes under heavy load?
Is the signal coming from humans that go on vacation every August?
Does the system that computes your model's input data ever change? If so:
How often?
How will you know when that system changes?
Consider creating your own copy of the data you receive from the upstream process. Then, only advance to the next version of the upstream data when you are certain that it is safe to do so.

Is your model part of a feedback loop?
Sometimes a model can affect its own training data. For example, the results from some models, in turn, become (directly or indirectly) input features to that same model.

Sometimes a model can affect another model. For example, consider two models for predicting stock prices:

Model A, which is a bad predictive model.
Model B.
Since Model A is buggy, it mistakenly decides to buy stock in Stock X. Those purchases drive up the price of Stock X. Model B uses the price of Stock X as an input feature, so Model B can come to some false conclusions about the value of Stock X. Model B could, therefore, buy or sell shares of Stock X based on the buggy behavior of Model A. Model B's behavior, in turn, can affect Model A, possibly triggering a tulip mania or a slide in Company X's stock.

